conditions such as using three convention filters. Under lesser conditions, it is equal.  
                                                 
20 Search YouTube for channel “Azlan Iqbal” or go to https://www.youtube.com/c/AzlanIqbal 

13. The computer-generated compositions using the TG1500p approach are of comparable aesthetic quality 
to compositions created by human experts, even though award-winning compositions are also judged 
by other factors not specifically accounted for by the aesthetics model used. 
 
Extended Findings 
 
1. The number of variations in a composition likely has little to no effect on its quality beyond a limited 
point. 
2. Human expert aesthetic assessment of computer-generated compositions (of not particularly high 
quality) tends to be inconclusive using a discrete scale. Other methods such as them selecting those 
which are thought to have been composed by a human tend to reveal more. 
 
These findings can be explored in more detail by the reader by referring back to section 4. Even so, there 
appears to be a pattern with regard to the DSNS approach, at least when aimed at creating objects of creative 
value within the domain of chess. It would seem that if the intended domain (i.e. the one in which objects of 
creative value are to be created) has a high quality source upon which to draw upon (e.g. Comp3.5), then using 
objects from unrelated domains may be unnecessary. However, a larger number of such objects and a larger 
number of attributes that describe each of those objects would likely improve the results.  
 
On the other hand, where a high quality source upon which to draw upon is not available – or only a low quality 
source is available (e.g. TG1500) – then using objects from other domains (e.g. actual photos of people) 
somehow improves results. Perhaps even to the point that is comparable to using a high quality source alone or 
even slightly better. The reason for this is not clear. The only explanation that appears to make some sense at 
this point is that the DSNS approach must be working in a way that is somewhat analogous to the neuro-
chemical substances and reactions that represent objects and experiences of all kinds in our brains. When these 
representations of objects combine and interact in poorly-understood ways, we sometimes are able to produce 
new objects that are deemed, ‘creative’.  
   
5.1 
Limitations of the DSNS and Its Possible Application in Other Domains 
 
While we have shown experimentally that the DSNS not only works but also outperforms other comparable 
approaches in automatic chess problem composition (of the three-mover variety, at least), there are certain 
limitations to consider. For instance, the ‘process’ of attribute or feature selection in a given domain is generally 
arbitrary, though they must be numerically representable. This usually goes against our scientific inclinations to 
be very precise and well-defined in our methods. However, we must realize that there is no known ‘formula’ for 
creativity and that different brains tend to perceive even the same things somewhat differently. This may be why 
some people are more creative than others. So the lack of a well-intended yet constraining process of attribute 
selection as may be found in other areas of artificial intelligence creates some confusion about ‘what works’ and 
what does not.  
 
There is also a question of how many objects in a particular domain should be used. The permutations can be 
endless and the only way to be sure, at least to a certain extent, is to run experiments as we have done in sections 
4.3, 4.4 and 4.5. We now know, for instance, that games between weak players and photographs of people can 
be used to generate relatively good three-move chess problems. However, the experiments do not explain why 
this is so. Is there a reason? Perhaps. Does it matter to scientists and engineers? Probably not because they can 
still study and build DSNS systems that work and create both artful and useful things (like chess problems). If 
we found out why, could we improve or optimize the DSNS process? Possibly. So the lack of knowing why can 
be seen as an additional limitation but perhaps just a temporary one. A lot more work by a lot more people in 
many different areas (e.g. neuroscience, AI, psychology, philosophy) is clearly required to make significant 
headway in answering the ‘why’ question. 
 
Can the DSNS be applied in other areas? In principle, the approach itself does not constrain it to chess. If we 
have or can imagine an existing system that is able to construct say, paintings, given a set of inputs like the 
number of colors, the size of the canvas, the frequency of a particular kind of stroke and the intensity of certain 
colors, the DSNS can indeed supply various combinations of these numbers that might result in interesting 
paintings. There is no way to be sure unless detailed and rigorous experiments, like the ones in this paper, are 
done. Perhaps drawings by young children in combination with classical music would produce the best results. 
So any domain that is able to construct creative objects given a set of inputs, whatever and however many there 
are (that can be represented using numbers) can indeed be tested for compatibility with the DSNS approach; but 
this is clearly beyond the scope and budget of the present work.  

6 
CONCLUSIONS  
 
Human creativity has proven to be quite an elusive concept to formalize; more so than ‘mere’ intelligence. Our 
creativity is not only a source of enjoyment in terms of being able to create beautiful objects but it is also the 
source of all our technological advancements such as useful ideas and designs that have materialized, be it 
vaccines to prevent disease or computerized vehicles to take us into space. Essentially, everything around us of 
value is the product of human creativity. So the incentive to ‘mechanize’ this process - perhaps in a way that 
could far exceed our own abilities – is clear. To date there have been many attempts by computer scientists and 
artificial intelligence researchers to develop software that can ‘come up’ with creative products such as music, 
poetry and paintings. Some more successful than others; yet improvements over time cannot be denied. 
 
However, to our knowledge, there is no single underlying process pertaining to computational creativity that is 
domain-independent. In this article, we have proposed just such a thing: the digital synaptic neural substrate 
(DSNS), named for its analogous nature to the generic, neuro-chemical substances that likely represent objects 
and our experiences in our brains. That generic substance that mingles and interacts in poorly-understood ways 
so as to sometimes, in some people, create that ‘Eureka!’ moment. The DSNS has been shown in this research to 
be effective in the process of composing chess problems of reasonably high quality21 – though not quite yet on 
the level of the best human composers – using information obtained from the same domain and also using 
information taken from the same domain and a completely unrelated domain. The reason for this is still an open 
question. A significant advantage of the DSNS approach is the lack of the need to program domain-specific, 
rule-based heuristics for creating creative content. It can be seen as an underlying process or backbone approach 
that can be ‘plugged in’ to any creative content generation system or tool by supplying the necessary attributes 
that system needs to do its work. The DSNS applies the necessary ‘constraints’ to the system to hone its output. 
 
There are virtually an infinite number of different ways or permutations to further test the DSNS approach. 
Variations might include in terms of the domain type, domain subtypes, desired output type, length of random 
search for a matching deviation value, and even combining more than two domains. Not to mention variations in 
the number of attributes and objects used. Which combinations work best and why? So the DSNS approach 
appears to be quite scalable and open to many further inquiries for interested researchers. However, these tests 
are beyond the scope of this already lengthy paper which aims primarily to introduce the DSNS approach and 
concept for use in the field of computational creativity and perhaps even other fields.  
 
From an artificial intelligence standpoint, one might imagine the DSNS approach implemented in an advanced 
