0.70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIX E: Unedited Expert Commentary on the DSNS-Generated Problems. 
 
Note that these comments were provided with no knowledge about the actual composer of the problems. The experts would have had 
to guess whether they were human or computer-generated. The parts in bold refer to the additional commentary the expert provided 
for the compositions he identified as most likely having been composed by a human. In the move notation ‘S’ and ‘N’ both refer to 
the knight. 
 
# 
FM (C) / IM (S) Vlaicu Crisan 
FM Matej Guid 
1 
Very weak key takes three flights. Short threat. Two variations 
ending with grab theme and same mate as in the threat. No 
duals in the real play a plus. 
obvious, plain 
2 
Awful key: major promotion from en prise position capturing a 
black officer with short threat and taking all four flights. wRc2 
used only as threat. Dual in the variation 3.Qa4#. 
slightly pretty, but with obvious moves 
there are many pieces and pawns on board (harder to 
design a problem automatically), perception of beauty is 
relatively humanlike (although this could be very 
subjective)..
3 
Double solution: 1.Qa7! ~ 2.h8=Q/R[+] ~ 3.Q[R]xf8#. The key 
takes three flights to the black King. The threat is unstoppable. 
plain 
4 
Weak give-and-take key: en prise rook captures the black 
Queen (last officer). The dualistic mate 3.Qb2# ruins the 
intended beauty of a mirror ideal mate. 
most straightforward 
5 
Short dualistic threat after the key. Three useless pieces (wRd4, 
wBc5 and bBbg7) - they could be easily replaced by white 
pawns d4 and e3. Poor construction. 
fairly difficult to find (there are reasonable alternatives at 
disposal)... also beautiful in the sense that a quite march 
forward by the pawn results in an effective check(mate) on 
the long diagonal 
this one was fairly complex, with a nice motif.. I also 
gave it the highest aesthetic rating... most computer-like 
compositions are far more simple (also in a 
computational sense)
6 
Bad key, capturing a whole Rook (last black piece) and taking 
two flights. Poor construction: bR can be replaced by bP. A 
second variation can be added easily (Ke3, Re1 - Kh2, pe4). 
The wR could actually stand anywhere from a4 to a8. I 
think a4 would be the preferred choice of a human, because 
of the figurative initial setting. 
very obvious moves, hard to miss any one of them 
 
7 
Double solution: 1.Qg3! Kd4 2.Rh5 Ke4 3.Rh4#. Dual in the 
main variation 1.Qd2 Ke5 2.Rh3 Ke4 3.Qe3#. No dual in the 
second variation 1.Qd2 Kf3 2.Rh3+ Kg4(Ke4) 3.Be6(Qe3)#. 
nice geometric position of the pieces a the end... but the 
fact that the black king is the only black piece makes it 
easier to find the solution... still: pretty 
it is possible that this one was designed by a computer... 
I find the geometry really pretty, and for this reason it 
seems to me that it is more likely that a human was the 
composer
8 
Weak key, taking two flights of which one is provided in the 
set play (e8) and short threat. No real fight: black must sacrifice 
its Bishop to stop the immediate mate. No duals. 
the strongest - and very obvious -  continuation wins, which 
makes it less beautiful 
9 
Obvious key, capturing the remaining black piece and taking 
five flights. Duals after 1...Kf1 2.Qd2/Qg6/Qc2/Qf3. Usage of 
two white Queens rather dubious. 
not capturing the knight would be beautiful, the solution 
involving capturing it is not 
10 
Key takes two flights and threatens two short mates. One 
variation only, with a line closing and line opening, ending 
