‘inspiration’ behind the new painting. It could also be that only one such object is mentioned while the other(s) 
remain buried deep in memory or the subconscious. We could not find any significant and descriptive 
neuroscientific or neurological bases for the creation of creative thought so researchers in other areas should be 
free to posit their own ideas for testing. There is also no ‘requirement’ for a functionally creative computational 
process to be grounded in the method employed by the human brain, whatever it may be.  
 
Typically, it should be self-evident that the human mind or rather brain must contain bits and pieces of 
information from various objects we have perceived through our experiences (in the form of generic neuro-
chemical substances) and is able to integrate them through volition in poorly-understood ways in order to 
(sometimes) create new objects of creative value.10 This fundamental basis of the ‘elements of creativity’ is 
therefore not mere conjecture. It is virtually unheard of that a person should be creative in mathematics knowing 
absolutely nothing about it. Some basic pieces of knowledge about mathematics – along with pieces of all sorts 
of other information the person has perceived and retained – must first reside in the brain. The precise method 
through which these pieces of information are intermingled – in particular with regard to producing creative 
objects or ideas – is far from understood so we freely posit our own ideas to be tested. With this concept of 
creative information processing in mind, the ‘DSNS’ terminology and approach was developed. 
 
First, we need two collections, sets or samples of objects from the same or different domains. For example, 100 
chess problems and 100 paintings (two domains); or 200 of either divided into two subsamples (one domain). 
Each object, depending on the domain it is from, is described using a set of attributes. A chess problem, for 
example, may be described using the attributes: the number of white pieces on the board, the Shannon value of 
those white pieces and the difference in value between the white and black pieces. These are things that could be 
perceived or found out about the objects in question. There is theoretically no limit to the number of attributes 
that can be used to describe an object. However, it should be numerically representable. A painting, on the other 
hand, may be described using the attributes: the number of pixels in the image, the number of colors used and 
the year it was painted. It is acknowledged that these attributes may not be related in any meaningful way; this 
is intentional to reflect the influx of various types of conscious and subconscious information into the brain. 
 
In selecting attributes, one might prefer unique attributes in the domain that do not ‘overlap’ much. For 
example, the number of pixels in the image should not be included along with say, the number of 16x16 blocks 
of pixels in the image because these are simply variations of the same concept. The number of white pieces on 
the board should not be included along with the number of white pawns on the board because the latter is a 
subset of the former. There are no fixed rules with regard to attribute selection (which is perhaps a strength 
when it comes to creativity) and we hesitate to state any but a little common sense and good judgement can go a 
long way. The number of attributes in a domain therefore also becomes more manageable. It is presumed that 
we have at least some basic knowledge about a domain sufficient for us to identify at least some of the attributes 
that may partially describe it. So it is fair to say that if we have absolutely no knowledge about a domain, we 
cannot identify and represent any of its attributes, much less in the form of numbers.  
 
Second, the attribute values for each object should be tabled as a single row along with its object identifier. This 
row and its values can be identified as a DSNS string. An example of three chess problem DSNS strings is 
provided in Table 1. The Forsyth-Edwards Notation (FEN) is a representation of the starting position of the 
chess problem. As an identifier or ‘key’ for the object, the FEN is typically included along with the attributes 
                                                 
9 Iqbal, M. A. M. (2014). A Process of Integrating Information from Different Domains for the Purpose of Generating Novel Creative 
Objects. Malaysia Patent Application No.: PI 2014703983. Filing Date: 24 December 2014. 
10 At present, this is experimentally somewhat beyond our present efforts with, for example, fMRI and brain hemodynamics to identify 
regions of the brain related to particular tasks or activities (Ruiz et al., 2014; Strang et al., 2014). 

and their values to make up the DSNS string for a chess problem. So in Table 1, each row, including the FEN, is 
a separate DSNS string. 
 
FEN 
White Pieces 
Black Pieces 
Value of 
White Pieces 
Value of 
Black Pieces 
Value 
Difference 
8/1p2BN1K/4Qp2/n1R4p/3k2P
1/P5n1/4P3/1r6 w - - 0 1 
8 
7 
23 
14 
9 
5rk1/5qpn/8/3N4/3B4/1B6/1K
P3R1/8 w - - 0 1 
6 
5 
15 
18 
3 
5Q2/b2k1P2/1n1NNn2/1P1p4/
6P1/8/8/7K w - - 0 1 
7 
5 
18 
10 
8 
  
Table 1: Example DSNS strings for three chess problems. 
 
An example of DSNS strings for three paintings is shown in Table 2. Here, a unique number serves as the 
identifier for each painting. The number of attributes for an object, especially between different domains, need not 
be fixed. In the example case presented, the chess problem sample and the painting sample each contain three 
individual objects with five attributes each. However, the DSNS approach also allows for an unequal number of 
attributes between the two domains being used. 
 
Painting ID 
Pixel Count 
Colors 
Identifiable 
Objects 
Year 
Aspect Ratio 
115 
398321 
