two subsets of 150 compositions each, for a total of four sets or subsamples. It stands to reason that with higher 
quality source materials, the DSNS approach should produce chess compositions of higher quality, on average, 
than with lower quality materials. For the compositions, the two subsets of 150 compositions were used to 
generate the deviation values (see section 3.1) and produce new pairs of DSNS strings for use by 
CHESTHETICA in composing new chess problems (see Appendix A). The same was done for the tournament 
game subsets. For brevity, these sets will be referred to as Comp3.5, Comp1.25, TG2500 and TG1500. 
  
The ten attributes used in the DSNS process for this domain represent some feature of the chess problem or 
tournament game sequence that a human observer might notice or be able to find out. They are, in principle, 
arbitrary, but should be obtainable by some means and describable using real numbers. These include: 
 
1. The number of white pieces in the initial position 
2. The number of black pieces in the initial position 
3. The Shannon value of those white pieces 
4. The Shannon value of those black pieces 
5. The difference between the two Shannon values (i.e. material difference) 
6. The number of moves in the sequence (fixed at 3) 
7. The year the chess composition was composed/tournament game was played 
8. The first piece to move in the sequence (P = 1, N = 2, B = 3, R = 4, Q = 5, K = 6) 
9. The last piece to move in the sequence (P = 1, N = 2, B = 3, R = 4, Q = 5, K = 6) 
10. The sparsity value of the initial position 
 
                                                 
15 http://www.bstephen.me.uk 
16 Aesthetics scores by the program typically range between 0 and 5 with hardly any at either extreme (none known to date, in fact). It is 
also difficult to determine what the highest possible aesthetics score for a three-move sequence could be given the dynamics and virtually 
infinite possibilities on the chessboard.   

The idea here is that these ‘scraps’ of information are similar to how the brain stores pieces of information from 
objects we observe. It is clear that few, if any, of us can remember objects in precise detail. More likely is that 
we remember particular attributes of an object that appeal or have some significance to us. Taken collectively, 
these features represent that object in our brains. The first two attributes are clear. The third is the total value of 
the chess pieces as described by Claude Shannon in his seminal paper on computer chess (Shannon, 1950). He 
attributed relative values to the chess pieces as follows: queen = 9, rook = 5, bishop/knight = 3 and pawn = 1.17 
The king is of infinite value because losing it means losing the game. With approximate values such as this, 
computers are able to gain a good idea of the material imbalances on the board and play a decent game of chess. 
Modern chess programs may use slightly different weights and hundreds of other game-playing heuristics but 
these values still serve well as a rough guide with regard to which army is doing better; sufficient for the 
purposes of our experiments. The fifth attribute is clear. 
 
The sixth attribute is the same for all the chess problems, i.e. ‘3’. In future implementations of the DSNS where 
chess problems of different lengths may be used, this attribute will vary, of course. The fact that this one 
attribute has the same value for all compositions and sequences actually makes the DSNS experiment more 
realistic because it is unlikely that objects from any domain would have attributes that differed in every regard. 
Paintings may have the same frame size or weight whereas musical tracks may all have the same frequency. All 
the attributes values taken collectively, however (as is the case in the DSNS approach) still provide for sufficient 
variation in the new DSNS strings to be generated. This is also not equivalent to ‘artifically’ leaving the sixth 
attribute out and using only nine. The seventh attribute is more subtle and not obvious from the moves itself. 
The sequence could have been composed or played yesterday or 500 years ago. This piece of information is 
nevertheless something that a user may care to find out by checking the game details available in most chess 
databases or by doing an online search.  
 
The eighth and ninth attributes are integer codes that represent the first and last pieces to move in the sequence. 
So if a bishop was the first piece to move in the sequence, the value for attribute 8 would be ‘3’ and if a knight 
was played in the last move of the sequence, the value of attribute 9 would be ‘2’. The tenth and final attribute 
used refers to an approximation of how spread out the pieces are on the board in the initial position. It is 
described using the following equation. s() denotes the number of pieces in the field of a particular piece, pn, i.e. 
in the squares immediately around it. A detailed explanation of the sparsity concept is available in (Iqbal and 
Yaacob, 2008). 
 
(
)
(
)
1
1
1
.
1
n
n
sparsity
n
s p
−
−


=
+




∑
 
 
A screen capture showing an excerpt of the spreadsheet with DSNS strings on the left and right (150 on each 
side) and the deviation value in the middle is available in Appendix B. A ‘random’ composing approach was 
also used as a control. Essentially, this approach does not use any ‘technology’ in composing chess problems 
and places the pieces on the board purely at random. Details are available in (Iqbal, 2011). CHESTHETICA was 
allowed to automatically compose using this DSNS approach (and the random one) for a total of 24 hours, i.e. 
12 hours on one machine and another 12 hours on another. The first computer (PC 1) was a notebook: Intel(R) 
Core(TM) i7-3820QM CPU @ 2.70 GHz with 16 GB of RAM running Microsoft Windows 7 Pro SP1 64-bit. 
The second computer (PC 2) was a desktop: Intel(R) Core(TM) Duo CPU E8400 @ 3.00 GHz with 4 GB of 
RAM running Microsoft Windows 7 Pro SP1 32-bit. Table 4 shows the ‘real world’ performance of 
CHESTHETICA in generating compositions using the DSNS approach.  
 
 
Sources for DSNS Approach 
