painting was enough of a computational challenge than creating a masterpiece (Cohen, 1999).  
 
With the defeat of then-world chess champion Garry Kasparov to IBM’s Deep Blue supercomputer in 1997 
(Newborn, 1997) and the general successes of AI in many small but significant ways in other fields (e.g. 
medical diagnosis, law, stock trading), demand and expectations from machines grew. Even with the resounding 
success of computer chess today such as computer programs running on smartphones playing at the grandmaster 
level and computers being indispensable in the training of human grandmasters, some experts still wonder, 
where is it going? (Kasparov, 2014). The many popular science-fiction films such as Colossus: The Forbin 
Project (Sargent, 1970), Blade Runner (Scott, 1982), Terminator 2 (Cameron, 1991), The Matrix (Wachowski 
and Wachowski, 1999) and A.I. (Spielberg, 2001) depicting intelligent and lifelike machines may also have had 
an influence on societal expectations from the field, regardless of their generally dystopian outlook.7  
 
Computational creativity therefore began to receive more serious attention from academia at the turn of the 
second millennium (Colton and Steel, 1999; Buchanan, 2001) perhaps to address some of these expectations and 
new challenges, in particular those related to the burgeoning Internet (Battelle, 2006). While most applications 
in this area are generally small and task-specific (like with traditional AI), others are far more ambitious and aim 
to replicate the workings of the entire human brain. For example, to ‘give rise’ to creativity and perhaps even 
what is known as the technological ‘singularity’ (Holmes, 1996; Seung, 2012; Kurzweil, 2012). This is when AI 
supposedly will overtake human intelligence and radically alter the world we live in. Even an attempt to mimic 
the functioning of a cat’s brain (Ananthanarayanan et al., 2009) was mired in controversy about its actual 
performance (Shachtman, 2009) so we can be fairly skeptical. There are also approaches that lie somewhere in 
                                                 
7 These productions are becoming more common and are dealing with even more sophisticated issues related to AI such as human-machine 
social interaction in the film, Her (Jonze, 2013; Saunders et al., 2013) and the transcendence of genuine human existence into the digital 
domain such as in the motion picture, Transcendence (Pfister, 2014). 

between traditional AI and computational creativity such as IBM’s Watson supercomputer which is apparently 
capable of extracting information and determining proper context (in English, at least). In short, it can ‘read’ and 
answer questions meaningfully (Chandrasekar, 2014). However, it cannot create any novel content of its own, 
like producing an article such as this.  
 
In principle, many of the fundamental approaches or techniques8 that have been developed in AI such as 
artificial neural networks, genetic algorithms and evolutionary computation (McCulloch and Pitts, 1943; Box, 
1957; Fraser and Burnell, 1970, Back et al., 1997) can and have been applied to varying degrees in 
computationally creative systems (Abe et al., 2006; Terai and Nakagawa, 2009; Correia et al., 2013; Machado & 
Amaro, 2013). Such systems may also take the approach of combining information or knowledge from within 
the same domain using mathematical logic, statistical modeling or some form of machine learning, which is also 
used in mainstream AI (Cope, 2005; Eigenfeldt and Pasquier, 2013). A tempting idea is for a computationally 
creative system to also learn from its own ‘experience’, much like humans are thought to do (Iqbal, 2011; Grace 
et al., 2013). However, the methods these systems use tend to be domain or task-specific as well. There is 
nothing inherently wrong with this if the system performs well but it is certainly not any kind of general 
intelligence or ‘creativity machine’ that the human brain is; some brains more so than others.  
 
In summary, the arsenal of approaches and techniques available in mainstream AI have trickled down to 
computational creativity and given rise to new types of applications, e.g. that generate creative objects, assess 
beauty or ‘interestingness’ (Iqbal et al., 2012; Pérez and Ortiz, 2013). At the same time, computational creativity 
researchers have found new ways to adapt mathematical logic and existing AI to suit their purposes. However, 
we could not find any approach documented in the literature that was able to successfully integrate discrete 
information from two or more unrelated domains so as to produce viable creative output in either one of the 
original sources. This is different from producing simultaneous outputs in more than one domain based on a 
particular set of inputs and with the help of an AI engine (Bengi and Ronchi, 2013). The successful integration 
of discrete information from multiple, unrelated domains for computational creativity purposes may be 
important if one subscribes to the notion that creativity in a particular domain can be borne out of ‘inspiration’ 
obtained from more than one domain. For instance, a musical piece composed that the composer says was 
inspired by the photo or memory of a beautiful companion. Whether or not such information in the brain is 
aggregated through systematicity (Phillips, 2014; Clement and Gentner, 1991) is presently unproven and 
therefore not assumed to be something our approach should be based on.  
 
So, is codification of context-specific, high-level concepts really necessary for this or do low-level ‘mindless’ 
mathematical interactions suffice? The process of biological evolution, for instance, is said to be a mindless and 
semantic-independent one that actually produces minds and even ‘free will’ (Dennett, 1996, 2012) even though 
there is much debate regarding the nature of the latter, particularly in association with the notion of 
‘consciousness’ (Chalmers, 1995, 2012; Harris, 2013). This is worth noting because consciousness and free will 
are often held by many as prerequisites to creativity. The idea is that ‘genuine’ (and general) creativity cannot be 
described in terms of a computable (and hence fundamentally mathematical or algorithmic) process. In the 
specific case of chess problems there has never, to our knowledge, been an approach to automatic composition 
that relied on a ‘creative process’ that was independent of human involvement and that could also, in principle, 
be applied to other areas. Section 2.4 of (Iqbal, 2008) provides a more detailed review of the main approaches in 
this regard that have been used in the past.  
 
In the following section, we nevertheless present our novel DSNS approach to computational creativity as 
applied to chess problems. We have intentionally left out the numerous other techniques in AI and 
computational creativity to compare against to keep the length of this paper manageable and more importantly, 
because they are fundamentally different to the one we propose even though they may be applicable to the same 
problem discussed. Ours, however, not only works given the aforementioned problem of quality automatic chess 
problem composition but is also scalable, in principle, to other domains. We therefore present our research in 
the practical spirit of fundamental science in that if something can be shown to work – even in a limited domain 
initially – why it works is of secondary importance. In fact, we readily concede there are open questions of this 
nature which are briefly discussed in section 6. 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
8 This is what makes them fundamental, i.e. they work to a reasonable extent and have had demonstrable applications beyond a single 
domain or task. Note that being task-specific is even more constrained than domain-specific. There is also the ‘no free lunch theorem’. 

3 
METHODOLOGY  
 
3.1 
The DSNS Approach Explained 
 
The Digital Synaptic Neural Substrate (DSNS) approach9 was intended to provide AI researchers with a generic 
method to combine information, or rather data, from different domains (e.g. chess, music, paintings) such that 
they could be integrated in such a way as to lead to the automatic creation of new, original objects from any one 
of those domains. A sort of catalyst for the ‘spark’ of creativity, if you will. An analogy may be the creation of a 
new painting by a human after having been exposed to or ‘inspired’ by a musical piece or a different painting 
and a musical piece. It would be difficult for the human painter to say for certain which aspects of each lead to 
which aspects of the new painting (or how) except that these two objects ‘come to mind’ when asked about the 
