2. Number of colors used in the image 
3. Number of distinct objects in the image 
4. The year it was created 
5. Aspect ratio (i.e. width divided by height) 
6. Brightness 
7. Contrast 
8. Noisiness 
9. Lightness 
10. File size (in bits) 
                                                 
18 We specify the gender of the selector here in case it is ever found to have influenced the results. 

The third attribute was determined through ‘manual’ and direct observation of each image by our female 
research assistant. These included, for example, people, tables and vases; so two people, one table and three 
vases would equal six distinct objects. ‘Brightness’ is a reference to how much all the pixels go from black 
(dark) to white (bright) (Bezraydin et al., 2007). The ‘contrast’ value was calculated as explained in (Koren, 
2006). ‘Noisiness’ relates to how random or unrelated, pixels are with other pixels surrounding them (Kerr, 
2008). ‘Lightness’ as in HSL (or Hue, Saturation, Lightness) was calculated as explained in (Yu et al., 2006). 
Much of this attribute information was obtained through programmatic means by our other (male) research 
assistant who is also a co-author. As with the previous experiment, attributes that can be used to describe the 
object are arbitrary as long as they can be represented using real numbers. Figures 4, 5 and 6 show examples of 
the renowned paintings, computer-evolved abstract art pieces and photographs of people used, respectively. 
 
 
 
 
Paris Through the Window by Marc Chagall 
1913 
Rue de la Bavolle, Honfleur by Claude Monet 
1864 
(a) 
(b) 
 
Figure 4: Examples of the renowned paintings used. 
 
 
 
 
Byline by the Elvira system, 2010 
Crown by the Elvira system, 2010 
(a) 
(b) 
 
Figure 5: Examples of the computer-evolved abstract art pieces used. 
 

 
Cute, beautiful and lovely kids on Pinterest  
by Patricia St Louis 
http://www.pinterest.com/pin/177188566561408314 
2013 
Mark Wahlberg and Kate Mara  
Shooter (motion picture), Paramount Pictures 
http://www.fdb.cz/film/odstrelovac-shooter/fotogalerie/43638 
2007 
(a) 
(b) 
 
Figure 6: Examples of the photographs of people used. 
 
The attributes used for the classical music pieces comprised of the following. 
 
1. Number of channels 
2. Sample rate / frequency 
3. File size (in bytes) 
4. The year it was composed 
5. Average loudness 
6. Sound energy 
7. Dynamic range 
8. Bitrate 
9. Sample size / quantization 
10. Sound efficiency 
 
‘Average loudness’ refers to the average peak to peak amplitude as calculated using the Python programming 
language Average (audio file) function. ‘Sound energy’ refers to the zero-crossing rate that the sound goes 
through, i.e. the amplitude going to zero. The greater the zero-crossing rate, the more energy it produces 
(Srinivasan et al., 1999). The ‘dynamic range’ is basically the noise floor subtracted from the peak signal. The 
‘bitrate’ is the number of bits of data used per second (e.g. 128 kbps) in the audio file. The ‘sample size’ refers 
to the quantization; typically 8 or 16 bits; 24 bits is also possible but less common. The ‘sound efficiency’ refers 
to the effectiveness of the sound signal measured by its crest factor, i.e. a measure of the impulsiveness of a 
noise or vibration signal (Norton and Karczub, 2003). Examples of the classical music pieces used include: 
Handel – Sarabande, Shostakovich – Romance and Mozart – Lacrimosa.  
 
Once again, for brevity, the chess source sets will be referred to as Comp3.5, Comp1.25, TG2500 and TG1500. 
The other domain sets with which the chess sets are merged with will be referred to as art (renowned paintings), 
Elvira (evolved abstract art pieces), photo (photographs of people) and music (renowned classical music pieces). 
In Table 6, for each pairing, the topmost row represents the number of compositions generated by 
CHESTHETICA for PC1, the middle row PC2 and the bottom row, in bold, is the total. So, for example, the 
Comp3.5 domain merged with the Elvira domain yielded 84 generated compositions in total. 
 
In principle, PC 1 is more powerful than PC 2 in terms of the processing power and available memory. In the 
previous experiment, there were too few samples to present any statistical analysis of the results. However, 
combining the information related to the DSNS approach in Table 4 with the information in Table 6, we have a 
sample size of 20 each for PC 1 and PC 2, which is not unreasonable for statistical purposes. A two-sample F-
test for variances was first applied to the samples to determine whether a two-sample, two-tailed, T-test 
assuming equal or unequal variances (i.e. TTEV or TTUV) should be used to compare the means (at the 5% 
significance level), i.e. the average number of compositions generated in 12 hours on a particular machine. This 
approach will henceforth be used where the means of two samples need to be compared. 

  
