
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
650 Idioms and Proverbial 
Phrases in Modern Standard 
Arabic 
650 Idioms and Proverbial Phrases in Modern Standard Arabic is the ideal tool for 
learners of Arabic who wish to improve their knowledge and comprehension of 
Arabic language and culture and make their language more expressive and idiomatic. 
Including over 650 idiomatic expressions found in contemporary Arabic, this 
book is divided into two parts. Part I lists the idioms alphabetically for ease of use, 
providing English equivalents and a range of illustrative example sentences to show 
how the idioms are used in different contexts. The idioms are chosen based on 
frequency of use in written Arabic as well as oral speech, in Arabic literature and mass 
media. Part II includes 30 practice exercises structured around original texts which 
include the idioms covered in Part I. These practice exercises encourage students to 
review the meanings of idioms while improving their reading skills and familiarity 
with various text genres. 
Designed to be comprehensive, accurate, and easy to use, the book reﬂects the 
daily use of Arabic and draws on real and authentic use of the language. Suitable for 
use as a textbook or reader, this is an ideal resource for students at CEFR level B1 to 
C2 or Intermediate-High to Advanced-High on the ACTFL proﬁciency scale. 
Lamia Jamal-Aldin is an Arabic language and literature academic with years of 
teaching experience at different universities in the UK and abroad. Lamia has a 
deep knowledge of the niceties of Arabic grammar and morphology in its classical, 
standard, and colloquial forms. Her passion for Semitic languages and her experience 
in pedagogy have driven her to develop unique and innovative methods in teaching 
Arabic as a second language. 
Abdullah Hammadi is a freelance writer, translator, and analyst. His areas of interest 
include Arabic language and the socio-political trends in the Middle East. He formerly 
worked as a survey manager on an MIT project in the Middle East. Abdullah has a 
deep and wide understanding of classical, standard, and colloquial forms of Arabic, 
and of the nuances of the language. Short stories, poetry, essays, political analysis, 
translations, and Arabic teaching materials are part of his writing portfolio. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
650 Idioms and Proverbial 
Phrases in Modern 
Standard Arabic 
اﻟﺘﻌﺎﺑﯿﺮ
 
اﻟﻠﻐﻮﯾﺔ
 
واﻷﻣﺜﺎل
 ﻓﻲ 
اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ
 
اﻟﺤﺪﯾﺜﺔ
 
For Intermediate to Advanced 
Students 
Lamia Jamal-Aldin 
Abdullah Hammadi 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
