 
 
 
Preface 
Signiﬁcant efforts have been made to ﬁnd the most accurate meaning for 
each idiom/proverb in Arabic and English. We went through many sources 
in both languages, comparing and analysing texts and materials to determine 
how the idioms/proverbs are used and in which context. We have noticed 
that inaccurate translations of some Arabic idioms are widely used today. 
One example is “false friends,” expressions that have similar forms in both 
instance is commonly and wrongly translated as “truth be told.” While it is 
used in English to admit or tell the truth about something negative, it is used 
in Arabic to express a positive opinion in defense of someone’s action. It is 
never used in Arabic to express negative thoughts. 
Part II includes 30 practice exercises; each has a text that uses idioms 
from Part I . We have written the texts speciﬁcally for this book, and they are 
diverse in their themes, styles, and genres. All the texts are ﬁctional, and 
they come in the form of short stories, reports, political analysis, articles, 
football match report, a letter of thanks, a formal speech, ofﬁcial statements, 
a Maqamah (Arabic rhymed prose), a eulogy, and a court ruling. The idi­
oms and proverbs are presented for study and practice in natural contexts 
within language usage that is informative, enjoyable, and simulates reality. 
Furthermore, the practice exercises concentrate on familiarising the student 
with the meanings of the idioms and proverbs and how they are used in dif­
ferent contexts and writing styles. Part II also can be used independently as a 
reader to enhance the student’s skills in reading and analysing different texts 
and genres in Arabic. 
This textbook/reader is indispensable for anyone who wants to develop 
and enrich their Arabic language and make it more expressive. 
) forاﻟﺤﻖ
 
ﯾﻘﺎلArabic idiom ( 
languages with totally different meanings. The 
xi 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
