The Digital Synaptic Neural Substrate:  
A New Approach to Computational Creativity 
 
 
Azlan Iqbal1, Matej Guid2, Simon Colton3,  
Jana Krivec4, Shazril Azman5 and Boshra Haghighi6 
 
 
  
ABSTRACT 
 
We introduce a new artificial intelligence (AI) approach or technique termed, the ‘Digital Synaptic Neural 
Substrate’ (DSNS). This technique uses selected attributes from objects in various domains (e.g. chess 
problems, classical music, renowned artworks) and recombines them in such a way as to generate new 
attributes that can then, in principle, be used to create novel objects of creative value to humans relating to 
any one of the source domains. This allows some of the burden of creative content generation to be passed 
from humans to machines. The approach was tested primarily in the domain of chess problem composition. 
We used the DSNS technique to automatically compose numerous sets of chess problems based on attributes 
extracted and recombined from chess problems and tournament games by humans, renowned paintings, 
computer-evolved abstract art, photographs of people, and classical music tracks. The quality of these 
generated chess problems was then assessed automatically using an existing and experimentally-validated 
computational chess aesthetics model. They were also assessed by human experts in the domain. The results 
suggest that attributes collected and recombined from chess and other domains using the DSNS approach can 
indeed be used to automatically generate chess problems of reasonably high aesthetic quality. In particular, a 
low quality chess source (i.e. tournament game sequences between weak players) used in combination with 
actual photographs of people was able to produce three-move chess problems of comparable quality or better 
to those generated using a high quality chess source (i.e. published compositions by human experts), and 
more efficiently as well. Why information from a foreign domain can be integrated and functional in this way 
remains an open question for now. The DSNS approach is, in principle, scalable and applicable to any 
domain in which objects have attributes that can be represented using real numbers. 
 
Keywords: artificial intelligence, creativity, brain, process, chess.    
 
           
1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Computational creativity can be classified as a relatively new sub-field of artificial intelligence (AI). In 
principle, it focuses on the generation of creative objects (e.g. music, visual art) using existing, modified and in 
some cases even new, typically domain-specific AI approaches or techniques. These objects are usually deemed 
to be creative from the perspective of humans sufficiently competent in the domain; otherwise known as 
‘experts’ (Johnson, 2012). Such systems allow for some of the burden of creative content generation to be 
passed from humans to machines. They also have the potential of challenging humans with new ideas not 
considered, discovered or explored by humans before. The way these objects are produced may also be relevant 
to their creative value in some cases (Colton, 2008), but not necessarily. An object of creative value might be 
deemed so based on its utility or beauty (or both). Remarkable products of engineering and design should 
therefore not be excluded by default. Notably, there is also the distinction between a ‘P-creative’ idea or object 
and an ‘H-creative’ one, where the former is considered something new to the person who generated it whereas 
the latter is new historically (Ritchie, 2007; Boden, 2009).  
 
There is still something significant in terms of design, at least, about computer systems that are capable of 
generating P-creative content even though the ultimate goal may be H-creative works. It can be argued that 
chance or serendipity plays an undeniable role in creativity as well (Pease et al., 2013) and to some extent this 
                                                 
1 College of Information Technology, Universiti Tenaga Nasional, Putrajaya Campus, Jalan IKRAM-UNITEN, 43000 Kajang, Selangor, 
Malaysia; e-mail: azlan@uniten.edu.my   
2 Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia; e-mail: matej.guid@fri.uni-lj.si 
3 Department of Computing of Goldsmiths College, University of London; e-mail: s.colton@gold.ac.uk 
4 Jozef Stefan Institute, Department of Intelligent Systems, Jamova cesta 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia; e-mail krivec.jana@gmail.com 
5 College of Graduate Studies, Universiti Tenaga Nasional, Putrajaya Campus, Jalan IKRAM-UNITEN, 43000 Kajang, Selangor, 
Malaysia; e-mail: shazril@uniten.edu.my   
6 (Formerly with) College of Graduate Studies, Universiti Tenaga Nasional, Putrajaya Campus, Jalan IKRAM-UNITEN, 43000 Kajang, 
Selangor, Malaysia e-mail: haghighi.boshra@gmail.com 

can be simulated. In any case, we will not here be drawn into philosophical musings about the ‘true’ nature of 
creativity or beauty (Sibley, 1959; Apter, 1977). We will instead abide by the standard and most reasonable 
conventions of assessment pertaining to creativity in the particular domain of investigation and also rely upon 
the judgements of human experts in that domain (Didierjean and Gobet, 2008). As with all computational 
approaches, the method must be described in sufficient detail so as to facilitate reproducibility, but due to the 
nature of creativity in humans – whom typically are not expected to explain themselves in such detail – this 
removes some of the ‘mystery’ and may affect the perception of quality with regard to the creative objects 
produced by the system.  
 
Chess problems, the main domain of investigation in this paper, typically requires considerable expertise, 
experience, time and most importantly, creativity, to produce. For this reason, and given our experience with the 
game in previous research works, we sought to test the DSNS approach in terms of its ability to facilitate 
‘creativity’ in the process of composing chess problems. The game of chess has always been a favorite domain 
of investigation for researchers in artificial intelligence, especially, and we found that to be true here as well. 
The reason is that it provides a controlled and computationally-amenable environment to perform experiments 
and test hypotheses, as will be evident later in the paper. Success in this domain, given its complexity, therefore 
suggests scalability of the DSNS approach and at least potential in others which are beyond the scope of the 
present introductory work. Section 2 provides a brief history and overview of some existing work in the field of 
computational creativity. Section 3 details the DSNS approach and the experimental methodology. In section 4 
and its subsections we present and discuss the experimental work. Section 5 consolidates the experimental 
results in point form with a discussion about the possible limitations of the DSNS and how it may be applied in 
other domains. Section 6 concludes with directions for further work.   
 
 
2 
REVIEW 
 
A good coverage of the concept and theories of creativity across various disciplines (primarily psychology) can 
be found in (Sternberg and Kaufman, 2010) but these are not particularly relevant here. The concept of 
creativity with regard to AI, however, is pertinent but not particularly new. It was mentioned in the proposal that 
lead to the famous 1956 Dartmouth Summer School often remembered as the birth of the field (Boden, 2009). 
Even so, the field was in its infancy back then and challenges specific to creativity as opposed to the ‘mere’ 
mechanization of tasks requiring human intelligence were generally unheard of (McCorduck, 2004; Levy, 2006; 
Ekbia, 2008; Warwick, 2011). Put simply, getting a computer to play good even though bland chess was enough 
of a challenge then than trying to make it play good and creatively, e.g. in a way that would surprise even the 
most stylistic human grandmasters, such as the late Mikhail Tal. Analogously, generating a relatively simple 
