7+-wQ-+-+-' 
6-+-+p+p+& 
5+-sNk+-zp-% 
4-+-+-+K+$ 
3+-+-zp-+-# 
2-+-+N+-+" 
1+-+-+-+-! 
xabcdefghy 
Vincente Maria Norberto Portil 
The Westminster Papers 
1872 
XABCDEFGHY 
8-+R+-+-+( 
7+-+n+pzpk' 
6-zp-vLn+-zp& 
5+-+Q+-+-% 
4-+-+-+-+$ 
3+-+-+-+P# 
2-+-+-zPPmK" 
1+-+-wq-+-! 
xabcdefghy 
Wells, P. K. vs. Baburin, A. 
BCF-chT 9900 (4NCL) 
1999 
1. Ne4 Kxe4 2. Qd8 e5 3. Ng3# 1-0 
37. Qf5+ g6 38. Qxf7+ Ng7 39. Qg8# 1-0 
(a) 
(b) 
 
Figure 3: A typical #3 chess problem and forced three-move mate sequence from a real game. 
 
4.2 
The Experimental Tool 
 
We used an experimentally-validated computational chess aesthetics model to evaluate the chess problems and 
tournament game sequences mentioned in the previous section.14 This model was incorporated into a computer 
program called CHESTHETICA (Iqbal et al., 2012). The present version is 9.22. Generally, the model uses 
formalizations of a selection of aesthetic principles and themes derived from the chess literature, in conjunction 
with stochastic technology (i.e. some randomness) to evaluate beauty in #3 sequences. We found it advisable to 
use the formalization or ‘equations’ approach to aesthetics (McCarthy, 2005) even though other approaches (e.g. 
an artificial neural network) may be effective as well; at present, however, these remain untested. Assessments 
based on the model – typically in the form a single digit number precise to three decimal places – correlate 
positively and well with domain-competent human aesthetic evaluation (Iqbal et al., 2012).  
 
A notable characteristic of the program is that it may produce a slightly different aesthetics score the second or 
third time it evaluates the same move sequence. However, this is generally inconsequential so only one cycle of 
evaluation was used per chess problem, i.e. not an average of 10 or 20 cycles per problem which would have 
been a waste of time and resources. We have not found a way to apply the model in its entirety as an heuristic 
which can be used in any sort of known hill-climbing search because the dynamics of the chessboard are not 
really predictable; which is what makes it such a creative endeavor and full of paradoxes. As an analogy, the 
ability to assess the beauty of an object (what the model does) does not automatically render that ability capable 
of producing such objects or improving upon them continuosly in a systematic way. We will not go into further 
detail about the model here or try to revalidate it in contrast to other generic ideas on aesthetics (Ritchie, 2007). 
Interested or skeptical readers are invited to review the aforementioned reference for a complete explanation.  
 
A downloadable version of CHESTHETICA ENDGAME (CEG) which supports both #3 and endgame studies 
is also available (Iqbal, 2012). Endgame studies are typically a longer, more sophisticated type of chess problem 
(Nunn, 2011). The reason we used this computational aesthetics model to perform the aesthetic evaluations of 
the three-movers is simply because it would be too much to ask of human experts to assess hundreds of 
problems and sequences. Doing so would also likely result in less consistent results due to fatigue and human 
error. CHESTHETICA v9.22 was modified and also used to automatically compose three-movers based on the 
DSNS approach. It is therefore the ‘generation tool’ in this particular case that relies on the new DSNS string 
attribute values, as alluded to in section 3.1. The newer composing module is independent of the program’s 
aesthetics evaluation components mentioned earlier. The program’s earlier composing module included a 
                                                 
14 Good references with regard to the field of computational aesthetics can be found in (Iqbal, 2015) and (Galanter, 2012). 

‘random’ and ‘experience table’ approach not particularly relevant to this research (Iqbal, 2011). Details about 
how the existing composing algorithm was modified to accommodate the DSNS approach is provided in 
Appendix A. 
 
The program is capable of imposing a ‘filter’ of up to 5 common composition conventions, namely, no cooked 
problems, no duals, no checks in the key (i.e. first) move, no captures in the key move and no key move that 
restricts the enemy king’s movement. Only the third one was applied for all experiments to keep the composing 
rate reasonably high and consistent for experimental purposes. The composing rate of CHESTHETICA drops 
exponentially the more filters are applied. This means it would take very much longer to get the same number of 
compositions. In general, a composition adhering to only one convention is considered of lower quality than one 
adhering to say, five. However, this is not necessarily true in every case and there is some evidence to suggest 
that composition conventions may not be as important to non-esoteric aesthetics as composers tend to think they 
are (Iqbal, 2014a). 
 
4.3 
The First Experiment: Same Domain 
 
The first experiment was intended to test the hypothesis that the DSNS approach – using one domain as a source 
– can be used to generate objects of creative value in the same domain, i.e. forced three-movers (compositions 
and from tournament games). The term ‘creative value’ here implies aesthetic value. Aesthetics was chosen as a 
measure of creativity because it stands to reason that beautiful man-made objects are typically the product of 
creative minds. We also intended to use the experimental tool, CHESTHETICA (see section 4.2) which is the 
only known experimentally-validated chess aesthetics evaluation software in the world. The Meson Chess 
Problem Database15 was used as a source of compositions by (largely) experienced human composers. From a 
total of 29,453 three-movers, 300 assessed to have an aesthetics score above 3.5 (by CHESTHETICA) were 
used.16 Another 300 assessed to have a score below 1.25 were also used. The two sets represent both high and 
low quality samples in terms of creative content. Each of these sets were randomly divided into two subsets of 
150 compositions each, for a total of four sets or subsamples. 
 
Forced three-move checkmate sequences taken from tournament games were also used. These were taken from 
the ChessBase Big Database 2011. From a total of 5,063,778 games, 300 games between players with an Elo 
rating above 2,500 were used. Another 300 between players with an Elo rating below 1,500 were used. These 
two sets also represent high and low creative content, respectively. Each of these sets were further divided into 
