By the same token, more than two domains can, in principle, be merged. The chess problem and music domain can be 
merged to produce a deviation of say, the chess problem type. This deviation can then be merged with a deviation 
from the painting domain to produce a deviation of the painting type. So data from the chess problem, music and 
painting domains can be combined to produce content in the painting domain. Theoretically, there is therefore no limit 
to the number of domains that can be merged in this way. 
 
3.3 
Using Strings of Different Length 
 
In some cases, a sample of DSNS strings may contain certain objects or ‘individuals’ that lack a particular attribute 
value. For instance, the ‘year’ attribute may not have been available for a particular object such as a painting. In such 
cases, it is still usable as a DSNS string along with other strings that actually have the year attribute value. The one 
that does not is simply given the value ‘NULL’. During the deviation-generation process (e.g. a string with 5 attributes 
and one with 4 attributes + 1 NULL attribute happens to be randomly selected) the one with 5 is reduced to 4 
attributes by removing the corresponding NULL one. So we are left with an even 4 to 4 DSNS string length in that 
particular case. This is different from having an attribute value of ‘0’, which is used like any other value. In general, a 
DSNS string of a different length implies that it either has fewer or more attributes.  
 
This is typically an issue only for strings from the same domain because as explained in section 3.2, using different 
domains implies generating two deviations (four DSNS strings involved) and only then merging the deviations. It 
would not be advisable trying to process two DSNS strings from the same domain but with entirely different attribute 
types. They should match so that the attribute values carry some meaning, even if occasionally the pair needs to 
default to using one attribute fewer due to a NULL entry in either one of them.  
 
3.4 
Assumptions and Implications 
 
This DSNS approach is assumed to be able to generate attributes that can then be used to generate creative content. 
All or some of the attributes may be used for this purpose, depending on the domain and external generation system 
available. Essentially, we randomly select two objects from a domain, ‘reduce’ them to DSNS strings and then use 
those strings to generate a deviation value that represents the ‘creative difference’ between those two objects. From 
this deviation value, two new DSNS strings are generated (with a similar ‘creative difference’). Each or even both of 
these can then be used to build or create one or more new objects that potentially have creative value. How these 
objects are created is a separate issue and dependent upon the domain in question and the generation or ‘building’ 
system available. Figure 2 shows a general diagram of the DSNS approach.  
 
It is therefore implied that raw data ‘extracted’ from an object – even from different domains – can be integrated such 
that new objects of creative value from either of the original domains, can be generated. This is comparable to how a 
human being perceives, say, a painting, which is likely represented in memory as a neuro-chemical substance or 
reaction in the brain, and then a piece of music, which is also represented in the ‘similar format’ neuro-chemical 
substance or reaction in the brain (analogous to the DSNS strings) so that they can be integrated (analogous to the 
deviation value) to produce either a new painting or new piece of music (analogous to the building specifications 
supplied by the new DSNS strings). It stands to reason that if the deviation value (i.e. the ‘creative difference’) 
between two DSNS strings derived from two objects can be matched by two new strings with realistic attribute values 
other than what was contained in the original DSNS strings, then these two new strings – in particular the attribute 
values they contain – can be used to generate or create new objects that would resemble the objects from which the 
original DSNS strings were derived, i.e. in terms of creative value. 
 
The contrast between the two DSNS strings which is represented by the deviation value is not necessarily a measure 
of how weak and strong, creatively, the two objects in question are. It could just as well be a measure of how different 
two equally strong (or equally weak) objects are in terms of creativity. Chances are, however, one is better or more 

interesting than the other, however slightly, even. This is also true for the two new strings from which two or more 
new objects can potentially be created. 
  
 
 
Figure 2: General diagram of the DSNS approach. 
 
 
4 
EXPERIMENTAL WORK AND DISCUSSION  
 
4.1 
The Domain of Investigation 
 
In order to test if the DSNS approach actually worked, we had to first select a domain of investigation that 
required creativity (Hesse, 2011). Given our prior experience and background, the domain of chess problems or 
compositions was selected. In particular, three-move, forced-mate problems (i.e. against any defense) otherwise 
known as ‘three-movers’ (#3, for short) since it is one of the most common and illustrative. Chess problems are 
basically like puzzles with a stipulation (e.g. White to play and checkmate in three moves) and the solver is 
challenged to discover the winning sequence of moves. In most cases, the solution is somewhat unexpected 
which is why problems are often considered works of art and beautiful or aesthetic in nature. Not all ‘working’ 
or valid problems, however, are equally aesthetic. For instance, the final forced three-move mate sequence taken 
from a tournament game between two expert players might resemble a composed chess problem in terms of the 
basic requirements but it lacks the forethought and ‘design’ that a human composer puts into a chess problem 
intended for publication in a magazine or book.  
 
Figures 3a and 3b show a typical three-mover and three-move checkmate sequence taken from an actual game 
between two expert players, respectively. The two are ‘physically’ similar in the sense that we have a starting 
position (in the case of the real game it is taken just prior to move 37) and the existence of a forced mate-in-
three sequence. They differ in the sense that the composition (3a) was designed to be economical and attractive 
whereas the real game occurred over the board in a tournament. Composition convention dictates that 
compositions should be designed such that they could have occurred in a real game (e.g. you cannot have a 
black bishop on the a8 square and a black pawn on the b7 square) and should appear realistic (e.g. you should 
not have 6 queens and 4 rooks of the same color).  
 
Compositions also tend to feature chess themes or motifs such as the grimshaw or plachutta with varying 
degrees of sophistication in their solutions, i.e. the main line of play and possible variations (Velimirovic and 
Valtonen, 2013). These can be planned during the design phase of a chess problem or they could simply emerge 
in a tournament game winning sequence. A good (as in of publishable quality) composition may therefore take 
an expert human composer hours or even weeks to compose; perhaps even longer. For these reasons, 

compositions are considered, on average, to be more attractive or aesthetic than sequences taken from real 
games (even between experts) where ‘design’ factors cannot be controlled and the players are furthermore 
typically under time constraints to win by any legal means possible, rather than to win artfully. These issues are 
explored in greater detail in (Iqbal, 2008), for the interested reader. 
  
XABCDEFGHY 
8-+-+-+-+( 
