Fig 12. A vector ﬁeld is the assignment of a direction at every point in parameter space. When those
directions are aligned with the typical set we can follow them like guide posts, generating coherent exploration
of the target distribution.
We are still left, however, with the problem of constructing a vector ﬁeld aligned with
the typical set using only information that we can extract from the target distribution. The
natural information that we have yet to exploit is the diﬀerential structure of the target
distribution which we can query through the gradient of the target probability density
function. In particular, the gradient deﬁnes a vector ﬁeld in parameter space sensitive to
the structure of the target distribution (Figure 13).
Unfortunately, that sensitivity is not suﬃcient as the gradient will never be aligned
with the typical set. Following the guidance of the gradient pulls us away from the typical
set and towards the mode of the target density. This behavior, however, isn’t necessarily
surprising. Because the target density depends on the choice of parameterization, so too
will its gradient. Consequently the gradient can direct us towards only parameterization-
sensitive neighborhoods like that around the mode, and not the parameterization-invariant
neighborhoods within the typical set.
To utilize the information in the gradient we need to complement it with additional geo-
metric constraints, carefully removing the dependence on any particular parameterization
while twisting the directions to align with the typical set. Auspiciously, there is an elegant
procedure for doing exactly this in a ﬁeld of mathematics known as diﬀerential geome-
try. Because diﬀerential geometry is a challenging subject that is rarely taught in applied
statistics curricula, however, building an understanding of the details and subtleties of that
procedure is no easy task.
Fortunately, there is a convenient equivalence that we can employ to build an intuition

20
BETANCOURT
Fig 13. The gradient of the target probability density function encodes information about the geometry of
the typical set, but not enough to guide us through the typical set by itself. Following along the gradient
instead pulls us away from the typical set and towards the mode of the target density. In order to generate
motion through the typical set we need to introduce additional structure that carefully twists the gradient
into alignment with the typical set.
for this procedure without delving into the technical details. The same diﬀerential geometry
that we need to use to correct the density gradients also happens to be the mathematics
that describes classical physics. In other words, for every probabilistic system there is a
mathematically equivalent physical system about which we can more easily reason.
For example, instead of trying to reason about a mode, a gradient, and a typical set,
we can equivalently reason about a planet, a gravitational ﬁeld, and an orbit (Figure 14).
The probabilistic endeavor of exploring the typical set then becomes a physical endeavor
of placing a satellite in a stable orbit around the hypothetical planet.
Because these are just two diﬀerent perspectives of the same mathematical system, they
will suﬀer from the same pathologies. Indeed, if we place a satellite at rest out in space
it will fall in the gravitational ﬁeld and crash into the surface of the planet, just as naive
gradient-driven trajectories crash into the mode (Figure 15). From either the probabilistic
or physical perspective we are left with a catastrophic outcome.
The physical picture, however, provides an immediate solution: although objects at rest
will crash into the planet, we can maintain a stable orbit by endowing our satellite with
enough momentum to counteract the gravitational attraction. We have to be careful, how-
ever, in how exactly we add momentum to our satellite. If we add too little momentum
transverse to the gravitational ﬁeld, for example, then the gravitational attraction will
be too strong and the satellite will still crash into the planet (Figure 16a). On the other
hand, if we add too much momentum then the gravitational attraction will be too weak to

A CONCEPTUAL INTRODUCTION TO HAMILTONIAN MONTE CARLO
21
Fig 14. The exploration of a probabilistic system is mathematically equivalent to the exploration of a physical
system. For example, we can interpret the mode of the target density as a massive planet and the gradient
of the target density as that planet’s gravitational ﬁeld. The typical set becomes the space around the planet
through which we want a test object, such as a satellite, to orbit.
Fig 15. The analogous physical system suﬀers from the same pathologies as the motivating probabilistic
system. In particular, a satellite at rest will fall under the planet’s gravity and crash into the surface of the
planet, just as any gradient-driven trajectory will crash into the mode.

22
BETANCOURT
(a)
(b)
Fig 16. (a) Without enough transverse momentum to balance against the gravitational attraction of the
planet, a satellite will still crash into the planet. (b) On other other hand, if the satellite is given too much
momentum then the gravitational attraction will be too weak to capture the satellite in a stable orbit, which
will instead abandon the planet for the depths of space.
capture the satellite at all and it will instead ﬂy out into the depths of space (Figure 16b).
If we add just the right amount of momentum, however, then the momentum will exactly
balance against the gravitational force, and the corresponding dynamics of the system will
be conservative. As the satellite falls towards the planet the momentum grows until it is
large enough to propel the satellite away from the planet. Similarly, if the satellite drifts
away from the planet then the momentum shrinks and the satellite slows, allowing gravity
more time to pull it back towards the planet. This careful exchange balances along the
desired orbit, ensuring that the subsequent evolution of the satellite will generate exactly
the trajectories that we need (Figure 17).
Pulling this physical intuition back into the probabilistic perspective, the key to twisting
the gradient vector ﬁeld into a vector ﬁeld aligned with the typical set, and hence one ca-
pable of generating eﬃcient exploration, is to expand our original probabilistic system with
the introduction of auxiliary momentum parameters. As in the physical system, however,
we can’t just add those momentum parameters arbitrarily. They need to be endowed with
a probabilistic structure that ensures conservative dynamics.
Remarkably, there is only one procedure for introducing auxiliary momentum with such
a probabilistic structure: Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.
3.2 Phase Space and Hamilton’s Equations
Conservative dynamics in physical systems requires that volumes are exactly preserved.
As the system evolves, any compression or expansion in position space must be compensated

A CONCEPTUAL INTRODUCTION TO HAMILTONIAN MONTE CARLO
23
Fig 17. When we introduce exactly the right amount of momentum to the physical system, the equations
describing the evolution of the satellite deﬁne a vector ﬁeld aligned with the orbit. The subsequent evolution
of the system will then trace out orbital trajectories.
with a respective expansion or compression in momentum space to ensure that the volume
of any neighborhood in position-momentum phase space is unchanged (Figure 18).
In order to mimic this behavior in our probabilistic system we need to introduce auxiliary
