of random trajectories that rapidly explore the target distribution, exactly as desired (Fig-
ure 20). Out in the tails of the target distribution, the momentum sampling and projection
steps allow the resulting Markov chain to rapidly fall in toward the typical set. Once the
chain has reached the typical set, the Hamiltonian trajectories ensure extremely eﬃciently
exploration.
4. EFFICIENT HAMILTONIAN MONTE CARLO
An immediate complication with this foundational construction is that it does not deﬁne
a unique Markov transition but rather an inﬁnity of them. Every choice of kinetic energy
and integration time yields a new Hamiltonian transition that will interact diﬀerently with
a given target distribution. Unfortunately, these interactions will usually lead to suboptimal
performance and we are left with a delicate tuning problem. When these degrees of freedom
are well-chosen, the resulting implementation of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo will perform
well on even the challenging, high-dimensional problems of applied interest. When they are
poorly-chosen, however, the performance can suﬀer dramatically.

A CONCEPTUAL INTRODUCTION TO HAMILTONIAN MONTE CARLO
27
q
p
Fig 20. Every Hamiltonian Markov transition is comprised of a random lift from the target parameter space
onto phase space (light red), a deterministic Hamiltonian trajectory through phase space (dark red), and a
projection back down to the target parameter space (light red).
In order to be able to optimize the application of the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo method
and ensure robust performance, we need to understand exactly how these degrees of free-
dom interact with the target distribution. Although this seems like a daunting task, we
can facilitate it by exploiting the latent geometry of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo itself. In
particular, the analysis is make much easier by considering a diﬀerent view of phase space.
4.1 The Natural Geometry of Phase Space
One of the characteristic properties of Hamilton’s equations is that they conserve the
value of the Hamiltonian. In other words, every Hamiltonian trajectory is conﬁned to an
energy level set,
H−1(E) = {q, p | H(q, p) = E} ,
which, save for some ignorable exceptions, are all (2D −1)-dimensional, compact surfaces
in phase space. In fact, once we’ve removed any singular level sets, the entirety of phase
space neatly decomposes, or foliates into concentric level sets (Figure 21). Consequently,
we can specify any point in phase space by ﬁrst specifying the energy of the level set it
falls on, E, and the position within that level set, θE (Figure 21).
Correspondingly the canonical distribution on phase space admits a microcanonical de-
composition,
π(q, p) = π (θE | E) π(E) ,
across this foliation. The conditional distribution over each level set, π (θE | E), is called
the microcanonical distribution, while the distribution across the level sets, π(E), is called
the marginal energy distribution.
Because they are derived from the same geometry, this microcanonical decomposition is
particularly well-suited to analyzing the Hamiltonian transition. To see this more clearly,
consider a Hamiltonian Markov chain consisting of multiple transitions (Figure 22a). Each

28
BETANCOURT
q
p
H-1(E)
Fig 21. Phase space naturally decomposes into level sets of the Hamiltonian, H−1(E). Instead of specifying
a point in phase space with its position and momentum, we can specify it with an energy, E, and its position
on the corresponding level set, θE ∈H−1(E).
Hamiltonian trajectory explores a level set while the intermediate projections and lifts de-
ﬁne a random jump between the level sets themselves. Consequently, the entire Hamiltonian
Markov chain decouples into two distinct phases: deterministic exploration of individual
level sets and a stochastic exploration between the level sets themselves (Figure 22b).
This decoupling makes it particularly convenient to analyze the eﬃciency of each phase,
and hence the eﬃciency of the overall Hamiltonian Markov transition. For example, the
eﬃcacy of the deterministic exploration is determined by how long the Hamiltonian tra-
jectories are integrated and, consequently, how completely they explore the corresponding
level sets. The cost of this phase, however, is ultimately proportional to the total integra-
tion time. The integration time needed to explore just enough of each level set, and hence
the overall eﬃciency of the deterministic exploration, depends on the geometry of the en-
ergy level sets. The more uniform and regular the level sets, the faster the trajectories will
explore for a given integration time.
Similarly, the performance of the stochastic exploration is determined by how quickly
the random walk can diﬀuse across the energies typical to the marginal energy distribu-
tion. Writing π(E | q) as the transition distribution of energies induced by a momentum
resampling at a given position, q, the diﬀusion speed depends on how heavy-tailed the
marginal energy distribution is relative to π(E | q). For example, if this energy transition
distribution is narrow relative to the marginal energy distribution (Figure 23a), then the
random walk will proceed very slowly, taking many costly transitions to completely explore
the target distribution. If the energy transition distribution is similar to the marginal en-
ergy distribution (Figure 23b), however, then we will generate nearly-independent samples
from the marginal energy distribution at every transition, rapidly surveying the relevant
energies with maximal eﬃciency.
By analyzing how these algorithmic degrees of freedom in the Hamiltonian Markov
transition interact with the target distribution to determine the microcanonical geometry,

A CONCEPTUAL INTRODUCTION TO HAMILTONIAN MONTE CARLO
29
q
p
(a)
q
p
(b)
Fig 22. (a) Each Hamiltonian Markov transition lifts the initial state onto a random level set of the
Hamiltonian, which can then be explored with a Hamiltonian trajectory before projecting back down to the
target parameter space. (b) If we consider the projection and random lift steps as a single momentum
resampling step, then the Hamiltonian Markov chain alternates between deterministic trajectories along
these level sets (dark red) and a random walk across the level sets (light red).


	
(a)

