written for adults, and when it comes to 
junky sci-fi movies, I point to a quote by the 
great science fiction writer Theodore Stur-
geon. An interviewer said to him, “Isn’t it 
true that 90 percent of science fiction is just 
crud?” And Sturgeon said, “Yes. Ninety per-
cent of anything is crud.”
Why does it matter what genre critics and 
others assign—or don’t—to a film?
First, let’s talk about what genre does. 
Genre offers a set of tools to tell stories 
about us and our lives. It allows us to talk 
about things in code. And so for westerns, 
that means that High Noon could talk about 
the Hollywood blacklist without ever men-
tioning communism. And for science fic-
tion, Invasion of the Body Snatchers could 
do the same thing. So you see a movie like 
that—a critic now might say, “Oh it’s about 
pods from space”—but I’m sitting there 
saying, “Wow, this is about some really in-
teresting ideas that they really couldn’t 
talk about directly in 1956 because some-
body would have yelled, ‘Commie!’” There 
would have been pickets in front of the the-
ater. But it’s pod people, so we can get away 
with it.
You just completed a science fiction novel—
Shh! It’s a Secret: A Novel about Aliens, 
Hollywood, and the Bartender’s Guide?
It’s due out in January. The premise is first 
contact between Earth and this other plan-
et. And now it’s a year later. They’ve been 
exchanging scientists, exchanging ambas-
sadors. And the son of an alien ambassador 
comes out to Hollywood and wants to be 
in the movies. It’s about the friendship be-
tween the movie executive and the alien as 
they’re working on what turns out to be a 
top secret movie project. So, yes, it’s about 
people. But it’s also science fiction.r
Kimmel’s ‘Baker’s Dozen’
So what are the must-see science fiction 
films? Kimmel provides a “baker’s dozen.” 
One note: “Where there are multiple 
versions, I go with the earlier one. Except 
for The Fly,” Kimmel says. “In that case, I 
favor the 1986 remake.”
•	 Metropolis (1927)
•	 Bride of Frankenstein (1935)
•	 Things to Come (1936)
•	 The Day the Earth Stood Still (1951)
•	 The Thing (1951)
•	 Forbidden Planet (1956)
•	 Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1956)
•	 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968)
•	 Colossus: The Forbin Project (1970)
•	 Sleeper (1973)
•	 Blade Runner (1982)
•	 The Fly (1986 remake of the 
1958 original)
•	 Gattaca (1997)
RECOMMENDED: Kimmel’s favorites 
include The Day the Earth Stood 
Still, Blade Runner (inset, top left), 
and 2001: A Space Odyssey 
(inset, bottom left). 

