I discuss these alternative modeling strategies to show that we are not limited to the simple approaches discussed in this chapter. If we find the approach 
too restrictive, we can use one of the alternatives, although at the expense of 
complicating the ensuing model.

6.5 SUMMARY 
• When a growing empire adds territory inhabited by people who are ethnically different from its core ethnie, it is expected that the initial loyalty of 
the incorporated ethnie toward the empire will not be high. The subsequent 
development of the geopolitical power of the empire will depend very much 
on whether, and if yes how fast, the newly incorporated population (and/or 
its elites) assimilates to the core ethnie.

• In this chapter I considered three basic sets of assumptions about how people 
switch their ethnic identity (a process that may involve linguistic assimilation, religious conversion, etc.).

• The noninteractive model posits that each nonassimilated individual has a 
constant probability of switching ethnic identity (per unit of time). Such an 
assimilation process results in asymptotic dynamics.

• The autocatalytic model assumes that assimilation occurs as a result of direct interpersonal attachments. The dynamics predicted by the autocatalytic 
model are the S-shaped logistic curve.

• The threshold model postulates an even more nonlinear mode of conversion: 
The rate of assimilation is positive if the proportion already assimilated is 
over a certain threshold. Otherwise, the assimilation rate is negative, leading 
to the inverse process in which core individuals assimilate to the peripheral 
identity. The dynamics of the threshold model are metastable.

• Next, I consider spatial extensions of all three models. The noninteractive 
model is not affected by adding space.

• The spatial autocatalytic model behaves globally in a logistic fashion if the 
social contact distribution is characterized by a thick tail. What this means in 
practice is that the assimilation process will not run out of potential subjects, 
if the already assimilated individuals manage to keep their social networks 
open, and thus continue reaching out and entering into new and distant social networks. If the contact distribution has a thin tail, then after an initial 
period of accelerated growth, expansion settles to a linear increase with time.

Finally, if there are segments of population poorly connected to the rest, they 
may remain as unassimilated islands in perpetuity.

• The spatial threshold model suggests that an assimilation process is difficult 
to get started. A critical mass of assimilated population has to be established 
ETHNOKINETICS 117 
in some locality, before the assimilation can start spreading. The spread, if 
successful, is linear. Gaps in social contacts can lead to a stable coexistence 
of two or more ethnic identities (this outcome is even easier to achieve than 
in the autocatalytic model).

• To determine which of the three simple alternative models describes the 
historical dynamics of identity switching, I investigated several data sets on 
religious conversion. I contrasted predictions only from nonspatial models, 
since I lack spatial data. The data concerned conversion to Islam in Iran and 
Spain, the rise of Christianity in the Roman Empire, and the growth of the 
Mormon church.

• In all case studies, by far the best model turned out to be the autocatalytic 
process. The initial acceleration period, predicted by the autocatalytic model, 
was obvious in all case studies. The autocatalytic model generated predictions of remarkable accuracy (greater than 99% of the variance explained in 
three out of four cases). The time scale of the conversion process was quite 
long: 2-3 centuries from the beginning to the midpoint (when half of the 
population is converted) in the Islam and Christianity cases (the Mormon 
church is currently quite far from the midpoint).

• More detailed analysis of the two Islamic cases revealed some systematic 
discrepancies between the predictions of the autocatalytic model and the 
data patterns. A modification of the autocatalytic model that allowed for 
immigration of the Muslim populations at a low rate matched this empirical 
pattern, suggesting this model as a viable contender in future empirical tests.

• An important general implication from this chapter is the demonstration 
that the formal approach advocated in the book (translating alternative hypotheses into mathematical models, and using data to distinguish between 
alternative models) can work in realistic historical applications. Furthermore, 
simple models can yield strikingly accurate results when applied to realistic 
historical data sets.

Chapter Seven 
The Demographic-Structural Theory 
7.1 POPULATION DYNAMICS AND STATE BREAKDOWN 
Unless prematurely extinguished by an overwhelming external force, empires 
typically progress through three stages: (1) polity formation and ethnogenesis of 
the core ethnie, accompanied by initial expansion within an ethnically similar 
substrate, (2) expansion to peak size, in the process acquiring a multiethnic character, and (3) stagnation, decline, and collapse (perhaps followed by a revival, 
and another imperial cycle). Mathematical models for the first two phases were 
advanced in Chapters 4 and 6. In this chapter I aim to investigate the causes of 
collapse.

A useful starting point is again provided by Ibn Khaldun, who postulated two 
major causes of state decline: (1) ideological (loss of asabiya) and (2) economic 
(including demographic and fiscal mechanisms) (Ibn Khaldun 1958:11:118-119).

We have already discussed the first mechanism in Chapter 4, so let us concentrate 
on the second one.

lbn Khaldun (1958:11:122-123, 135-137) notes that recently established states 
are moderate in their expenditures and just in their administration. As a result, 
taxation is light, and little coercion of subjects is needed. Such benevolent rule 
creates conditions under which people will flourish, and "procreation will be vigorous." General prosperity causes both rulers and people to become accustomed 
to increased spending ("luxury" in lbn Khaldun's words}. The army and the bureaucracy demand and receive higher pay. Although population numbers build up 
gradually, eventually (after several generations) the society reaches the limits of 
its growth. However, habits of luxury continue to increase, and must be paid for, 
