in laying the objections of critics to rest.

However, I would like to add one more element to the Borsch argument, suggested by the demographic-structural models. In particular, recollect that the selfish elite model predicts that the period of population decline is characterized by 
high elite/peasant ratios and correspondingly high exploitation rates. Eventually, 
however, the elite numbers decline, as a result of a combination of processes (sliding into the peasant class because of economic difficulties, lower reproduction, 
and high mortality resulting from civil wars). This is what happened in England 
by the end of the Wars of the Roses. As elite numbers decline to a low enough 
level, exploitation of peasants eases off, their per capita consumption rates rise, 
and the conditions are set for the next secular cycle to begin.

In Egypt, however, Mamluks continued to be recruited from exogenous sources 
(note that children of Mamluks could not themselves become Mamluks). Thus, 
while the rural population declined, Mamluk numbers did not, leading to a high 
elite/peasant ratio that did not decline with time. As a result, the Egypt of Mamluks was caught at the equilibrium of low population numbers, high elite/peasant 
ratio, and intense exploitation of peasants. This vicious equilibrium was apparently stable to internal perturbations and could only be broken by an outside 
force, in this case, the Ottoman conquest of 1517.

It is interesting that the comparison between the English and French postplague trajectories provides further evidence for this scenario. Note that economic 
and demographic growth in England was delayed, perhaps by half a century, in 
comparison to France (this is discussed later in Section 9.1.2). The recovery of 
England was probably delayed because "the English nobility was (at least temporarily) able to resolve some of its difficulties at the expense of the French 
counterpart by means of the convulsions attendant upon the Hundred Years War" 
(Bois 1985:113). Once the English were expelled from France, they immediately 
experienced their own period of internal warfare (the Wars of the Roses, 1455-
1485). Only after this extensive pruning of the English nobility could the English 
economy start growing again.

7.4 SUMMARY 
• Population growth in agrarian societies leads to a gradual decrease in per 
capita production, due to diminishing returns on labor inputs into agriculture.

The surplus available for the state shrinks and eventually becomes insufficient to provide for the state's needs. Thus, unchecked population growth 
leads to the fiscal insolvency of the polity.

• State breakdown and ensuing sociopolitical instability have a negative impact on both demographic rates (birth, death, and migration rates) and the 
productive capacity of the society. As a result, state breakdown is typically 
followed by periods of population decline.

• A simple mathematical model of the interaction between population dynamics and the fiscal health of the state predicts recurrent episodes of state 
building and population growth followed by state breakdown and population 
decline. For the range of plausible parameter values this demographic-fiscal 
model predicts that state breakdown should occur at somewhat irregular intervals 2-3 centuries apart.

• A more sophisticated model that keeps separate track of the commoner and 
elite segments of the population predicts similar dynamics (periodic state 
breakdown). Growth of the commoner population leads to the expansion 
of elite numbers and, initially, strengthening of the state. However, as elite 
numbers grow, an increasing proportion of the extracted product is appropriated by the elites for their needs. State revenues decline, while expenditures 
increase, and eventually the state becomes bankrupt.

• I develop two models focusing on the political dynamics of nomadic elites 
interacting with agrarian states. The Ibn Khaldun model investigates the situation in which nomads periodically conquer the agrarian state and establish 
a ruling dynasty there. The parasitic nomad model addresses the situation in 
which nomads do not conquer the agrarian state, instead imposing a tribute 
on it. In both cases the models predict faster cycles of polity building and 
collapse (periods of about a century), compared to cycles generated by the 
demographic-fiscal model and its class-structured variants.

• I briefly review two economic models advanced to explain the dynastic cycle in Chinese history. The basic logic underlying the explanation offered 
by these models of the collapse of Chinese Empires is also MalthusianRicardian, although they are somewhat more complex than the models I 
develop.

• The structural-demographic explanation of early modern state breakdown developed by Goldstone (1991b) postulates population growth as the primary 
cause of state collapse. It is important to emphasize, however, that in this 
theory (and in the models I develop) population dynamics do not directly 
cause the state breakdown. Rather, population growth promotes political instability indirectly, by causing the state's fiscal distress, increased elite competition and factionalism, and increased mobilization potential of the general 
populace. I review one of Goldstone's case studies, the English Revolution, 
for which a particularly complete cliometric database exists. These data are 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUGURAL THEORY 149 
found to be in very good agreement with the quantitative predictions of the 
structural-demographic model.

• Finally, I briefly review Fischer's (1996) theory and data dealing with 
four "great waves" of socioeconomic dynamics in western Europe from 
the twelfth to the twentieth century. Again, my conclusion is that these 
ideas and analyses are broadly consistent with the theory developed in this 
chapter.

• Depending on the structural assumptions and parameter values, the models 
developed in this chapter can generate a variety of dynamics. Oscillations 
can be either regular or quite irregular. Average periods are generally long 
but may range from one to three centuries. Changes in the commoner population may be very drastic or mild (in the case of "elite cycles"). But one 
general conclusion is that agrarian states are characterized by instability and 
oscillations on the time scale of centuries. I propose that we call such dynamics secular cycles or waves.

Chapter Eight 
Secular Cycles in Population Numbers 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
A major prediction emerging from the demographic-structural theory (Chapter 7) 
is that population numbers in agrarian societies are expected to go through slow 
oscillations with a periodicity of approximately two to three centuries. 1 We do not 
necessarily expect these secular cycles to be very regular. What the theory does 
say, however, is that these dynamics should be of second order. The concept of 
process order was introduced in Section 2.1.4 and will be further formalized for 
human population dynamics below. Put in nontechnical language, however, what 
I mean is that both the increase and decrease phases of population oscillations 
should occur over periods of multiple human generations.

Secular waves in the socioeconomic and demographic history of western Europe have been described by Fran~ois Simiand(l932), Wilhelm Abet (1966), 
Michael Postan (1973), and Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie (1974) (see also Braudel 
