Usher's and Chu and Lee's models are based on a rational choice argument: peasants weigh the utilities of staying peasant or turning into a bandit and then make 
the appropriate occupational decision. In principle, this is an interesting and potentially powerful approach for building theory and making empirical predictions.

Yet, I am troubled by the nature of the utility function that these authors chose: 
commoner utility is essentially the expected income (in food units) multiplied 
by their survival probability. My feeling is that this is too much the economist's 
approach, and that a more sociologically sophisticated approach is needed that 
would build upon collectively held norms and collectively made decisions.

An even more serious criticism of these two models is that they focus on 
the popular rebellion as the main mechanism causing the state collapse. Yet, 
Goldstone ( 1991 b) presents a very convincing argument, buttressed by numerous 
empirical cases of early modem state breakdown, that popular uprising by itself 
usually could not bring down the state. Peasants are poorly armed, trained, and 
organized, and stand almost no chance against the coercive apparatus of the state 
when backed up by cohesive elites. Goldstone argues that the state collapse is 
brought about by factional fighting among the elites, which then opens the way for 
popular rebellion (furthermore, even peasant uprisings are often led by members 
of the elite). Thus, current theory states that popular discontent is, in a sense, a 
secondary factor. We should look to elite dynamics for the main mechanism of 
state breakdown.

Despite the above criticisms, I believe that the models by Usher and by Chu 
and Lee make an important contribution to building the theory of state breakdown.

Note that the underlying force for state breakdown in both models is population 
growth, which leads to a gradual fall in income per head, until eventually the 
surplus over bare subsistence is insufficient to provide for the ruling class (Usher 
1989). Usher and Chu and Lee did not specify their models to the point where 
we could determine what type of long-term dynamics they predict. But the basic 
model that I proposed in Section 7 .2.1 does that, and suggests that the dynamics 
should be characterized by recurrent (if somewhat irregular) state building-state 
collapse cycles of around 2-3 centuries in length for the likely parameter values.

Furthermore, it would be interesting to see if the rational choice perspective 
could provide insights about elite dynamics. Thus, it would be instructive to apply 
the "occupation choice" module not to peasants, but to elites during the period 
of worsening economical conjuncture, (that is, striving for an official position or 
turning rebel). This approach, however, would get us well beyond the current 
goals of the book, so I leave it to future investigations.

7.2.5 Summing up Theoretical Insights 
Demographic-structural models discussed in this section suggest two general insights. First, as a result of diminishing returns on labor, population growth in 
agrarian societies inevitably leads to a gradual fall of per capita income. Eventually, the surplus produced by peasants becomes insufficient for the maintenance 
of the state. State bankruptcy and collapse can be prevented only if population 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 139 
numbers are kept below the critical threshold at which state expenditures match 
state revenues.

The second insight is the key role of elites in state dynamics. Elites can limit 
commoner population growth by leaving commoners with less income than is 
necessary for bare subsistence. However, there does not seem to be a general 
mechanism for limiting elite population growth. In some exceptional cases, the 
state apparatus may be able to function independently of elites, and provide the 
necessary coercive force to limit elite numbers. In other cases, elites themselves 
may choose to limit their population growth. In most agrarian societies, however, 
I expect that elite numbers will increase beyond the sustainable level, leading to 
state breakdown.

The elite attributes have a strong influence on the period and amplitude of state 
buildup/breakdown cycles. Two parameters appear to be of main importance: elite 
reproduction rate and extraction ability. High reproduction rate and low extraction ability lead to fast cycles of the lbn Khaldun type, with a period of around a 
century, and mild amplitude of oscillations in commoner numbers. A low reproduction rate, approaching that of commoners, increases the period of the cycles.

A higher extraction ability leads to more drastic falloffs of commoner population. Longer cycles also lead to a greater amplitude of commoner population 
oscillations, because a longer decentralization phase causes commoner numbers 
to decrease to a lower level. As a result, the dynamics of commoner population 
in the selfish elite model with low elite reproduction and high extractive ability 
are similar in their period and amplitude to the population dynamics in the basic 
demographic-fiscal model.

Note that in all models I assumed that elite recruitment is a result of reproduction. In real societies, of course, elite numbers grow both by reproduction of 
existing elite families and by upward social mobility from the commoner strata.

I investigated the effect of adding this mechanism for elite recruitment to models, and found that it does not affect the qualitative insights from the theory.

Essentially, the dynamics depend on how fast elite numbers grow, and it does not 
matter by what mechanism this growth occurs.

There is a number of ways in which the simple models discussed here can be 
extended. For example, it would be very interesting to redefine the variables in 
the Chu and Lee model in terms of the Jack Goldstone theory, with the three 
structural variables being the numbers of commoners, elites, and dissident elites 
(or "antielites"). Another interesting direction is to expand the list of variables 
not only to include the numbers of individuals in any particular stratum, but also 
to keep track of the average accumulated resources per individual in the stratum. Such a variable would be analogous to the accumulated state resources that 
enters as an explicit variable in most demographic-structural models. Recently, 
Malkov and co-authors developed models addressing this issue (Malkov et al.

2000; Malkov and Sergeev 2002).

The final issue that I need to address here is the terminological one. What 
should we call the dynamics predicted by the suite of demographic-structural 
models developed here? Models predict very long-term oscillations with periods 
ranging from one to three centuries, depending on the model structure and parameter values. The dynamics are characterized by two phases: centralization, when 
political stability is high, and decentralization, when political instability is high.

The decentralization phase, when the state is weak or absent, can extend for various periods of time and does not necessarily lead to a centralization phase. Thus 
the oscillations predicted by the models are not necessarily strongly periodic.

