
In short, ethnic divisions have the potential to severely reduce the geopolitical 
power of the state. However, ethnicity is not a static variable, and ethnic composition of a polity continuously changes. Ethnic composition changes, first, as a 
result of demographic mechanisms (differential rates of population increase) and, 
ETHNOKINETICS 95 
second, as a result of ethnosocial mechanisms (Bromley 1987), such as ethnic 
assimilation and mobilization. Thus, whether alloethnic elites will assimilate to 
the core ethnie or not, and how fast this process proceeds, should have a great 
effect on the fortunes of the empire.

The overwhelming majority of medium- to large-sized polities in history were 
polyethnic (McNeill 1986; Hall 1998). Because geopolitical power depends so 
much on the ethnic composition of a polity, we need to develop some quantitative 
understanding of how and why the ethnic composition of polities evolves with 
time. Thus, the main purpose of this chapter is to develop dynamic models of 
ethnosocial change. I call such models ethnokinetic, because mathematically they 
are very similar to models of chemical kinetics. My primary emphasis is on ethnic 
assimilation, because of its postulated importance to the empire's power base. I 
should also remind the reader that, because I use the broad definition of ethnicity, 
I do not reduce assimilation to just linguistic assimilation. Granted, language 
or dialect is a very important cultural marker of ethnicity. However, during the 
period of interest, religion often provided an even more relevant (meta)ethnic 
marker. Thus, the two social processes of particular interest for purposes of this 
chapter are linguistic assimilation and religious conversion as examples of how 
ethnic identity may be changed. My empirical examples below will be drawn 
from instances of religious assimilation.

6.2 THEORY 
6.2.1 Nonspatial Models of Assimilation 
The Noninteractive Model 
I begin with the simplest possible formulation of an ethnokinetic process. First, I 
assume that there are only two groups: the core and the periphery ethnies. Second, the population growth rates of the two ethnies are the same. This means 
that the relative proportions of core and peripheral ethnics change with time only 
as a result of individuals switching ethnic allegiance (identity). Third, peripheral ethnics switch their ethnicity and become members of the core ethnie with 
a constant probability per unit of time. These assumptions lead to what I call 
the noninteractive assimilation model (noninteractive because the probability of 
switching ethnic identity does not depend on what others are doing). Very similar 
models were proposed by Hopkins (1973) and Cederman (1997), although these 
authors modeled not two, but several classes of individuals (classified according 
to whether they were assimilated or not, and mobilized or not).

Obviously, the assumption of two distinct ethnies, with individuals making 
an instantaneous switch between them, is a great oversimplification of the reality. However, there were some instances in history for which this simple model 
may provide not a bad approximation. I refer to those historical ethnies who defined their ethnic boundary primarily (or even exclusively) in terms of religion.

"Switching of ethnic identity;• then, refers to the religious conversion. 1\vo historical examples in which the entry into the core elite was relatively open to 
individuals willing to convert to the state religion were the Ottoman Empire and 
Muscovite Russia. More complicated situations, involving language barriers as 
well as multidimensional ethnic boundaries, are discussed in Section 6.5.

Let C be the proportion of population in the core ethnie, and P = 1 - C be 
the proportion of population in the peripheral ethnie. The probability of ethnic 
switch from periphery to core is p. Then, the differential equation describing the 
dynamics of ethnic composition at the macro level is 
C=pP=p(1-C). (6.1) 
We have already encountered this simple model of asymptotic growth in Section 2.1 [see equation (2.3)]. At low values of C, this variable grows approximately linearly, and eventually it approaches the equilibrium point c• = 1 in an 
exponential manner (refer to Figure 2.1c).

When deriving equation ( 6.1) I assumed that only members of the periphery 
could switch ethnic identity. We can allow for an inverse process, in which members of the core ethnie switch identity ("going native," so to speak; for example, 
Old English in medieval Ireland; Kidd 1999:146). Suppose the probability of 
switching from the peripheral to the core identity is p0 , while the probability 
of the reverse switch is p1• This modification leads to a very similar model of 
asymptotic growth: C = p0P- p 1 C = p0 - (p0 + p1 )C. However, at equilibrium, 
the proportion in the core ethnie is not 1 but c• = p0/(p0 + p 1). This equilibrium, 
however, is approached in the same fashion as in the simpler model: initially linearly, then asymptotically.

The Autocatalytic Model 
Although the noninteractive model has been used to investigate ethnic assimilation (e.g., the multiclass modifications of Hopkins 1973 and Cederman 1997), I 
believe it is deeply flawed. It is not a matter of it being overly simple, because 
the alternative I am about to discuss is equally simple (actually simpler, as it has 
one fewer parameter). The problem is that the noninteractive model assumes a 
sociologically implausible scenario. Societies are not composed of atomized individuals; instead, each individual is embedded within a social network (or multiple 
networks) of other individuals. What we know about the spread of rumors, innovations, and perhaps ethnicity suggests that these cultural elements spread by 
contact, from one individual to another along the social networks (Rogers 1995).

Taking religious conversion, individuals simply do not convert to a new sect spontaneously, upon reading about it in the newspaper, for example. On the contrary, 
as sociologists of religion have demonstrated (Stark 1996; Stark and Bainbridge 
1996), conversion, like contagion, travels along interpersonal links. "The basis for 
successful conversionist movements is growth through social networks, through a 
structure of direct and intimate interpersonal attachments" (Stark 1996, emphasis 
in the original).

How can we translate these assumptions at the micro level into a model describing dynamics of conversion at the macro level? The rigorous approach would 
ETHNOKINETICS 97 
require an explicitly spatial approach (where "space" may refer to social rather 
than physical space). We discuss such an approach in the next section. Here, 
however, I seek to capture the difference between a noninteractive and a network 
based assimilation (or conversion) processes with a simple model, so space has 
to be implicit in it. Let us, then, simply assume that the probability of conversion 
is proportional to the numbers already converted, and explore the consequences 
of this assumption.

To make things slightly more complicated, I will allow ethnic switching in 
both directions. Let the probability of an individual switching from the peripheral 
to the core identity (per unit of time) be p0 = r0C, and the reverse probability 
p1 = r1P (the probability of switching into an ethnie is proportional to the fraction 
of population belonging to the ethnie; the proportionality constants r0 and r1 
are relative rates of switching). The rate at which peripherals are switching to 
the core, then, is the product of the probability of switching multiplied by the 
