7.7 Price index of consumables in western Europe, 1200--2000. 144 
8.1 Population of England and Wales, 1080--2000. 155 
8.2 Population of several European countries, 1000--2000. 158 
8.3 Population dynamics of China from 200 B.C.E. to 1710 c.E. 160 
8.4 Relative proportion of excavated settlements occupied during 
each period in seven western areas of Roman Empire. 162 
8.5 New houses built on Wetherill Mesa, fifth to fourteenth century. 163 
8.6 Population dynamics and political instability in China. 165 
8.7 Effects of population density and political instability on the 
population rate of change in China, 200 B.c.E.-430 c.E. 167 
8.8 Effects of population density and previous political instability on 
the current instability in China, 200 B.c.E.-430 c.E. 168 
9.1 Frontier intensity in NFR and the area of French polity. 175 
9.2 Population history of Roman Gaul. 176 
9.3 Movement of grain prices in France and England from 
1500--1750. 181 
List of Tables 
2.1 Durations of imperial phases for large polities. 26 
5.1 Results of the empirical test of the frontier model. 84 
5.2 Results of the empirical test of the positional effects model. 90 
6.1 Summary of empirical tests of the autocatalytic model. 113 
6.2 Predictions of logistic versus noninteractive models for religious 
conversion. 115 
8.1 Summary of nonlinear time-series modeling analysis of the 
English and Chinese population data. 157 
8.2 Coefficients of determination in models fitted to population rate 
of change and political instability index. 166 
Preface 
Many historical processes are dynamic: growth and decline of populations, territorial expansion and contraction of empires, trends in political centralization/ 
decentralization, and the spread of world religions, to name just a few examples.

A general approach to studying dynamical systems is to advance rival hypotheses 
based on specific mechanisms, translate the hypotheses into mathematical models, 
and contrast model predictions with empirical patterns. Mathematical modeling is 
a key ingredient in this research program because quantitative dynamical phenomena, often affected by complex feedbacks, cannot be fully understood at a purely 
verbal level. Another important ingredient is the full use of statistical techniques 
(such as time-series analysis) for quantitative and rigorous comparison between 
model-predicted and observed patterns. This general approach has proved to be 
extremely successful in natural sciences. Can it be instrumental in increasing our 
understanding of historical processes? 
Historical Dynamics is an attempt to answer this question. The specific problem 
chosen for analysis is the territorial dynamics of agrarian states. In other words, 
can we understand why some polities at certain times expand, while at other times 
they contract? The advantage of focusing on territorial expansion/contraction is 
that we have reasonably accurate empirical data on this aspect of historical dynamics (historical atlases). The focus on agrarian polities is motivated by the extent of empirical material (roughly, from the third millennium B.C.E. to 1800 c.E.) 
and the greater simplicity of these societies compared to modern ones, potentially 
making them easier to understand and model.

Although the main focus of the book is on territorial dynamics, it is clear 
that the ability (or inability) of states to expand depends very much on their internal characteristics. Thus, in order to understand how and why states expand 
and contract, we need to study military, economic, demographic, ethnological, 
and ideological aspects of social dynamics. I consider four sociological theories potentially explaining territorial dynamics. The first is the geopolitical model 
of Randall Collins. This theory has been very clearly formulated and requires 
minimal work to translate into a mathematical model. The second one, by contrast, is an original development. Starting from ideas of the fourteenth century 
Arabic thinker lbn Khaldun and recent developments in sociobiology, I advance 
a theory attempting to explain why the capacity for collective action may vary 
among different societies. The third theory addresses the issue of ethnic assimilation/religious conversion dynamics. Finally, the fourth theory focuses on the interaction between population dynamics and sociopolitical stability. The connection 
between population growth and state breakdown is based on the demographicstructural model of Jack Goldstone (another well-formulated theory that is easily 
xii PREFACE 
translated into a dynamical model). To this model, I add the feedback mechanism, 
postulating how state breakdown and resulting sociopolitical instability negatively 
affect population numbers. The four theories address somewhat different aspects 
of historical dynamics, and thus logically are not mutually exclusive. However, 
alternative hypotheses about particular empirical patterns can be derived from 
them and tested with data. I present several such empirical tests.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Many people provided extensive comments on previous book drafts or draft chapters. I am particularly indebted to Tom Hall, Jack Goldstone, Sergey Nefedov, and 
the anonymous reviewer who read the whole draft and provided numerous and 
truly excellent comments and criticisms. I also wish to express my deep gratitude to Marc Artzrouni, Robert Boyd, Christopher Chase-Dunn, Randall Collins, 
Lev Ginzburg, Robert Hanneman, John Komlos, and Nikolai Rozov for their 
comments on various parts of previous drafts. Many thanks to Svetlana Borinskaya, Andrey Korotayev, and other. members of the Social Evolution group in 
Moscow for constructive critique and general encouragement. I am grateful to 
Marc Artzrouni for providing the graphical output of his simulation model for 
Figure 2.4. Finally, I wish to thank Jennifer Slater for excellent copyediting, Kathy 
Tebo for help with typing and proofreading, and Mirko Janc for his ''TeXpert" 
typesetting.

Historical Dynamics 
Why States Rise and Fall 
Chapter One 
Statement of the Problem 
1.1 WHY DO WE NEED A MATHEMATICAL THEORY IN HISTORY? 
Why do some polities--chiefdoms and states of various kinds-embark on a successful program of territorial expansion and become empires? Why do empires 
sooner or later collapse? Historians and sociologists offer a great variety of answers to these and related questions. These answers range from very specific 
explanations focusing on unique characteristics of one particular polity to quite 
general theories of social dynamics. There has always been much interest in understanding history, but recently the theoretical activity in this area has intensified 
(Rozov 1997). Historical sociology is attempting to become a theoretical, mature 
science.

But why do historical sociologists use such a limited set of theoretical tools? 
Theory in social sciences usually means careful thinking about concepts and definitions. It is verbal, conceptual, and discursive. The theoretical propositions that 
are derived are qualitative in nature. Nobody denies the immense value of such 
theoretical activity, but it is not enough. There are also formal, mathematical approaches to building theory that have been applied with such spectacular success 
in physics and biology. Yet formalized theory employing mathematical models 
is rarely encountered in historical sociology (we will be reviewing some of the 
exceptions in later chapters).

The history of science is emphatic: a discipline usually matures only after it 
has developed mathematical theory. The requirement for mathematical theory is 
