somehow endogenize this variable, that is, to postulate mechanisms that cause it 
to wax or wane in response to other dynamic properties of societies and polities.

So far, no respectable sociological theory has managed to do this, in my judgment, although there are many hints scattered through the theoretical literature.

For example, Hechter (1987) starts essentially with the same concept of collective solidarity that is being developed here. He makes this "groupness" itself a 
dynamic variable (Hechter 1987:8). However, he then makes a valiant attempt to 
develop a rational choice theory of group solidarity (Hechter 1987: Chapter 3), 
which is, however, doomed for reasons given in the previous section. Collins 
(1992: Chapter 1), in already cited passages, constructs a powerful argument in 
favor of collective solidarity as an important historical variable. In Chapter 2 he 
discusses one mechanism that can generate solidarity: Durkheim's theory of religion. However, Collins never connects solidarity with other historically important 
variables in a dynamical theory. Smith (1986:38) discusses how interstate warfare may ignite and maintain ethnic sentiment: "One has only to read Aeschylus' 
description of the Persian Wars in which his brother was killed and he himself 
fought, to grasp the communal significance for the ethnic identification of each 
individual, of collective resistance on the battlefield through the activation of comradeship, teamwork and esprit de corps in moments of crisis." Yet, again, warfare 
was almost continuous throughout history, but some polities grew and others declined even while under pressure from external aggression. We need something 
more to build a theory on. Tantalizing hints are also scattered throughout the historical literature. Here is, for example, McNeill (1963:809) discussing the rise of 
Prussian industry in almost the same words as those of Smith: "a managerial elite 
with strong internal discipline and an esprit de corps quite different from the individualistic and nakedly pecuniary ethos common among British businessmen." 
I could go on. There are, however, two theories that have been developed to the 
point where they can actually yield testable predictions: Ibn Khaldun's theory of 
asabiya, and Gumilev's theory of passionarity.

3.2.1 Ibn Khaldun's Theory 
The fourteenth-century Arab thinker lbn Khaldun was probably the first sociologist in the modem sense (Gellner 1981). In his monumental work The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History he advances a remarkable theory of political 
cycles. lbn Khaldun developed his theory mainly to explain the history of the 
Maghreb (Northern Africa), but he also makes excursions to other areas known 
to him (e.g., Arabic Spain and the Middle East). lbn Khaldun was not an ivorytower academic. He was a practicing politician and almost lost his life in a failed 
coup. He also traveled extensively (even encountering and having a long conversation with Timur Lenk once). In short, Ibn Khaldun knew well the workings of 
the societies he studied from the inside.

Groups and Group Solidarity 
lbn Khaldun's main argument is remarkably modem (the following account partly 
relies on the introduction by the Muqaddimah translator Franz Rosenthal, indicated by lower-case Roman page numbers; upper-case Roman numbers indicate 
the volume). He begins by postulating that a human individual cannot live outside 
a group: it is absolutely necessary for man to have the cooperation of his fellow 
men (lbn Khaldun 1958:I:90). Defense and protection are successful only for a 
closely knit group (Ibn Khaldun 1958:I:263). But a communal way of life is also 
necessary for acquiring different crafts and technical skills, and for intellectual 
intercourse. The next postulate is that different groups have different abilities for 
concerted action. Here Ibn Khaldun introduces the key concept of his theory: 
asabiya, which Rosenthal translates as "group feeling." Originally the word signified something like "making common cause with one's agnates" (lbn Khaldun 
l958:I:lxxviii). But in lbn Khaldun's usage, asabiya is a wider concept, because 
it can also be shared by people not related to each other. Asabiya produces ''the 
ability to defend oneself, to offer opposition, to protect oneself, and to press one's 
claims" (lbn Khaldun l958:I:289). Preponderance of asabiya renders one group 
superior to others (Ibn Khaldun 1958:I:lxxix).

Ibn Khaldun was clearly aware of the nested nature of ethnic groups, and that 
each level has its own asabiya associated with it. For example, he notes that, in 
order for the higher-level group not to fall apart, its asabiya must be stronger than 
the asabiyas of lower-level groups combined (lbn Khaldun 1958:1:284). Additionally, he continuously stresses that the leading or ruling element within a group 
must be vested in a family or lineage that has the strongest and most natural 
claim to the control of the available asabiyas (lbn Khaldun 1958:I:lxxx). Only 
COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY 39 
the leader who controls an asabiya of sufficient strength may succeed in founding 
a dynasty.

Dynamics of Asabiya 
lbn Khaldun also develops a detailed theory explaining how asabiya is created, and also how it is lost. In general, asabiya arises from "the social intercourse, friendly association, long familiarity, and companionship" (Ibn Khaldun 
1958:I:374). This is remarkably similar to the explanation of how social capital is 
acquired (Putnam 2000; for a comparison of asabiya and social capital, see Section 3.2.3). However, not all social conditions are equally conducive to the growth 
of asabiya. As I mentioned above, lbn Khaldun's theory was developed for the 
specific situation of the Medieval Maghreb. Ibn Khaldun distinguishes two major ethnic groups inhabiting the Maghreb: the Berbers and the Arabs. These two 
groups differ not only ethnically, but also in the way their societies are organized: 
respectively, "desert" and "civilization." The distinction that lbn Khaldun makes, 
however, is not between nomadism and sedentary life; he rather groups together 
nomads and sedentary backwoods people, and contrasts them with sedentary urban people as inhabitants of large population centers (Ibn Khaldun 1958:I:lxxvii).

The sociological distinction is not qualitative, but quantitative, and refers to the 
size and density of human settlements, as well as the scale of polities. "Desert" 
is characterized by small-scale polities {chiefdoms, in the modem terminology).

"Civilization" is organized in states and empires (except during the periods of 
state breakdown).

In lbn Khaldun's view, the society type is the key to understanding why asabiya 
increases or declines. "Desert" life with its constant struggle for survival and, consequently, necessity of cooperation creates conditions for asabiya growth. "Civilized" society controls a large number of human beings. A large amount of human 
labor becomes available, and a certain proportion of it may be channeled into 
production of "conveniences" and luxuries (that is, not necessities). This development toward luxury carries a penalty in the form of causing degeneration. The 
ruling dynasty, and therefore the state (Ibn Khaldun does not make a distinction), 
is the principal victim of this tendency to luxury (Ibn Khaldun 1958:I:lxxxilxxxii). lbn Khaldun (1958:11:119-122) essentially argues that access to luxuries 
causes increased intraelite competition and eventually intraelite conflict. As a 
result, asabiya rapidly declines. lbn Khaldun even provides a quantitative assessment of the rate of decline: it takes four generations from the establishment to 
the disappearance of a dynasty, although it may continue into the fifth and sixth 
generations in a state of decline (I:281).

In addition to the decline of asabiya, there is another major factor that causes 
the disintegration of the state: economics. According to lbn Khaldun, general 
prosperity leads to population growth, which in turn leads to scarcity, increased 
oppression by the elites, and eventually state collapse. This aspect of Ibn Khatdun's theory is further pursued in Chapter 7, in the context of the demographicstructural theory.

In summary, here are the main points of lbn Khaldun's argument about the dynamic relation between asabiya and polity strength. Asabiya grows and is maintained at a high level in small-scale societies, where the capacity for collective 
action is the key to survival. Additionally, such societies produce only necessities, 
and therefore there is no corrosive effect of luxuries on asabiya. lbn Khaldun's 
primary example of such "desert" societies are the Berbers of Maghreb, although 
he also cites other instances, e.g., several Arab tribes who invaded northwestern 
Africa in the eleventh century (1:283). Desert tribes with high asabiya conquer 
civilized people with low asabiya, and establish a ruling dynasty (a state) over 
