the longevity of an empire in how many secular cycles it has survived. This is 
a particularly appropriate scale, because the final collapse of empires typically 
occurs during one of the demographic-structural crises.

Measured in this way, a "typical" empire is good for two or three secular cycles.

The Roman polity, for example, survived three: the Republic, the Principate, and 
the Dominate. France, as we saw in Section 9.1, went through three cycles prior 
to 1900 c.E. (Capetian, Valois, and Bourbon), and is now in the fourth one.

The Frankish Empire went through two cycles (Merovingian and Carolingian), 
although an argument can be made that there was a third cycle-the Ottonian 
and Salian emperors of the medieval German Empire who were direct successors 
of the Carolingians (thus, the Rhine valley was the geographical core of both the 
Carolingian and Holy Roman Empires; see Barraclough 1998:118). Russia went 
through two cycles prior to 1900: the Muscovite and the Imperial (or Romanov) 
waves. China had a succession of empires, with a typical duration of two secular 
cycles: East and West Han, then a long period of fragmentation (an intercycle); 
Early and Late Tang, another intercycle; Sung and Southern Sung, followed by a 
period of alien rule (Mongols, or the Yuan dynasty); and finally Ming and Qing 
(although the latter can be considered as another alien dynasty). I can go on, but 
it looks as if examples of imperial duration of one or four secular cycles are rare.

One example of a short-lived empire is the Principality of Kiev, which managed 
to survive for only one cycle (from the tenth to the twelfth century, with the coup 
de grace delivered by the Mongols in 1240).

Thus, the interaction between the demographic-structural and asabiya mechanisms is likely to be limited to periods of instability, at least to the first order 
of approximation. Therefore, I advance the hypothesis that large successful empires are destroyed by a combination of asabiya decline and the decentralization 
phase of the secular cycle. When asabiya is still high, an empire will reconstitute 
itself after a time of troubles. If asabiya has declined too far, then the period of 
instability will spell the end of the empire.

Because ethnokinetic and demographic processes occur on roughly the same 
time scale, these mechanisms may interact in more intricate and unpredictable 
ways. The basic problem is that the phase of the secular cycle may affect the 
magnitude and even the sign of the assimilation rate. During the centralization 
phase, when the elite/general population ratio is favorable, the imperial core elites 
are likely to be open to the entry of peripheral aspirants. Such a situation is highly 
conducive to strong pressures for assimilation. By contrast, during the decentralization phase, imperial elites close their ranks against newcomers aspiring to 
better their position, who then have no choice but to build alternative power networks, and challenge the established order. These "counternetworks" are likely to 
be based on peripheral identities. The specific symbolic markers used to differentiate the core elites from the dissidents may be based on religious, linguistic, 
or regional differences. Thus, social conditions during the decentralization phase 
may actually favor "reverse assimilation," in which members of a core ethnie 
living in a peripheral region are under pressure to assimilate to the peripheral 
identity. At this point, this is just a hypothesis, but certainly capable of being 
tested empirically.

Furthermore, there is a feedback effect from assimilation dynamics to 
demographic-structural mechanisms (Chapter 6). If the process of assimilation 
has largely run its course, then those particular markers (religious or linguistic) 
will probably not serve as a basis for elite fractures. Otherwise, under the 
pressures of the decentralization phase, the elites will fracture right down the 
ethnic lines, potentially with disastrous consequences to the empire.

Another conjecture is that during the time of troubles we should expect a 
"narrowing down" of the asabiya profile. That is, whereas during good times 
the members of the elite may identify themselves primarily with the empirewide 
ethnie, when times are bad, they may fall back on their regional (subethnic) 
identity.

Finally, there is the possibility that bigenerational cycles interact with the secular ones. In Section 9.1.2 I briefly touched on the pattern of two-generation cycles 
in political instability that seem to succeed each other during the decentralization 
phases. There may be a connection here to the Kondratieff waves, which are of 
the same duratio_n (40-60 years). For example, Joshua Goldstein (1988) argued 
that the Kondratieff waves have an effect on war dynamics in Europe. This is 
another avenue clearly worth pursuing.

CONCLUSION 203 
10.3 BROADENING THE FOCUS OF INVESTIGATION 
At the beginning of this book, I deliberately narrowed down the focus of the 
research program to the dynamics of agrarian polities. I believe such a focus is 
appropriate, especially during the beginning of an investigation. Here is the time, 
however, to discuss what was left out.

One important class of societies that I discuss in a very inadequate manner is 
the nomadic pastoralists. Addressing these societies should be the first order of 
business, particularly because nomadic polities were so important in the history 
of Eurasian empires.

Another class, which I completely left out, is the thalassocratic polities such 
as classical Athens, medieval Venice, or early modem Holland. Thus, my focus 
has been entirely on land-based rather than sea-based power, tellurocracies rather 
than thalassocracies. Again, this choice was deliberate. The basic resources of 
tellurocracies are land and people (thus my emphasis on territorial and population 
dynamics). I believe this makes tellurocracies particularly amenable to analysis 
with rather simple models. Note that I tried to avoid any monetary issues (at least 
in models). Also, the economic submodel in the demographic-structural theory 
is quite simple, focusing entirely on food production. Such an oversimplified 
approach will clearly not do for thalassocracies.

My focus on land power has led me to largely ignore the voluminous literature 
on hegemonic cycles (Modelski and Thompson 1996), even though I find this 
literature extremely fascinating. Another excellent field of research that I touched 
upon lightly is world-systems theory (Wallerstein 1974; Chase-Dunn and Hall 
1997). The reason is my focus on the polity as the main subject of analysis. This 
focus leads to a certain bias, which I readily acknowledge: a tendency to look for 
endogenous causes of the rise and fall of empires. At this point, I can only state 
that I wholeheartedly agree with the idea that we need to understand how systems 
of interacting polities work. This is also clearly the next order of business.
