where f, g, and h, are some functions. That is, the rate of change of X and Y 
depends on all three variables in the system, while the rate of change of Z is 
given by some time-dependent function. There are two general ways to model Z: 
(1) as a stochastic variable or (2) as a deterministic trend. Which approach we 
choose depends on the nature of the exogenous variable, and the questions we 
wish to ask.

In Sections 2.1.1-2.1.3 I identified three fundamental types of dynamics characterizing purely endogenous systems. The simplest type encompasses systems 
that are not affected by negative feedbacks. I will call such dynamics zero order.

Next, there are systems that are affected only by feedbacks acting very rapidly, 
which I will call first-order dynamics. Finally, there are systems that incorporate 
GEOPOLITICS 15 
multiple endogenous variables, leading to negative feedback loops acting with a 
time delay. These are second-order systems.

Allowing exogenous variables leads to a natural generalization of this order 
typology as follows. Zero-order systems are characterized by this general model: 
X =/(Z(t)) (2.8) 
In effect, X itself is the exogenous variable. Examples of such systems are various kinds of random walks (biased or otherwise), stochastic exponential increase 
or decline models, and so on. Such systems typically do not have an equilibrium 
density around which they fluctuate (unless we construct the function fin a very 
special way, to force such an "equilibrium" exogenously). Zero-order systems are 
not terribly interesting from the dynamical point of view, because any systematic 
dynamical patterns found in them are entirely due to the action of exogenous 
variables. The power of the dynamical systems approach would be largely misspent in applying it to such systems. However, zero-order dynamics provide a 
natural null model, against which other more complex alternatives can be tested.

First-order systems are governed by models of the form 
X=f(X,Z(t)) (2.9) 
where Z is an exogenous variable and does not depend on X. If Z is a stochastic 
variable, and f includes a negative feedback, then the dynamics are characterized 
by a stochastic equilibrium. X fluctuates in the vicinity of the stable equilibrium, 
and if X becomes too high or too low, endogenous dynamics push it back to the 
equilibrial level of fluctuations (in other words, the dynamic process is characterized by a return tendency). No cycles or any other kinds of complex dynamic 
behaviors occur in first-order systems, unless they are exogenously imposed (for 
example, Z oscillates periodically).

Second-order systems are governed by models like 
X =f(X, Y, Z(t)) 
Y =g(X, Y, Z(t)) 
where Z is again an exogenous variable. More than two endogenous variables 
can be involved. Second-order systems are capable of all kinds of complex dynamics: stable equilibria, limit cycles, quasiperiodicity, chaos, multiple coexisting 
attractors, etc. Adding stochasticity expands the spectrum of possible behaviors 
even further. However, for the purposes of this book, I will call all such behaviors 
second-order oscillations. Perhaps the time will come when we have methods and 
data good enough for distinguishing between limit cycles and chaos in historical 
systems, but this time is not here yet. The fundamental importance of distinguishing between the three kinds of dynamics is that in zero-order systems all dynamics 
are driven exogenously, while in the first- and second-order ones some proportion 
of the variance in fluctuations is explained by the action of endogenous variables.

Furthermore, different social mechanisms can often be classified as either fast or 
slow feedbacks, leading, correspondingly, to either first- or second-order dynamics. Detecting and characterizing such oscillation-inducing feedbacks is a major 
goal of the proposed research program in historical dynamics.

2.2 THE COLLINS THEORY OF GEOPOLITICS 
One of the most powerful formulations of the geopolitical theory is found in the 
work of Randall Collins (1978, 1986, 1995); see Rozov (1997). Because Collins 
states his geopolitical principles clearly and succinctly, this verbal theory can 
be relatively easily translated into mathematical models. Furthermore, Collins 
and eo-workers have also advanced formal geopolitical models, formulated as 
computer simulations (Hanneman et al. 1995). My plan in this section is to review 
the postulates advanced by Collins, and translate them into simple differential 
models. I will also do the same for the simulation model of Hanneman et al.

(1995), thus bringing these developments to a common denominator. Another 
interesting model that is relevant to the issues at hand is the spatial simulation by 
Artzrouni and Komlos (1996).

2.2.1 Modeling Size and Distance Effects 
As is natural, Collins' thinking has evolved over the last two decades, so the material below is based on his 1995 article, specifically on his Figure 1 there, which 
I redraw here as Figure 2.2. The main variable of interest is the state's territory 
size, or area. Temporal change in this variable occurs as a result of war success.

The positive arrow from "war success" to "territory size" indicates that when 
the state is successful in war, it gains territory, while war failure implies territory 
loss. Territory size also positively affects "geopolitical resources" (more taxes and 
Territory 
size 
A 
Marchland 
position 
p 
Logistical 
loads 
L 
Geopolitical 
resources 
R 
War 
success 
w 
Figure 2.1 Feedback structure of the Collins geopolitical model. (After Collins 1995: 
Figure 1) 
GEOPOLITICS 17 
recruits for the army), which in turn positively affects war success. Increased territory size also means increased "logisticalloads." The further that military power 
is projected from the home base, the higher the costs (Collins 1995:1558). Additionally, more state resources are tied up in policing the populace and extracting 
the resources. This connection between the state's size and logisticalloads is often referred to as the "imperial overstretch" principle (Kennedy 1987). Increased 
logistic loads, in turn, have a negative effect on war success. Finally, "marchland 
position" favors war success, because states with enemies on fewer fronts expand 
