
5.2.1 Europe: 0-1000 C.E.

During the first half of the millennium the political geography of Europe was 
dominated by the Roman Empire. The frontier of the Roman Empire was largely 
stationary, although with some oscillations. There were advances into Germania, 
northern Brittania, and Dacia that were not sustained for long periods of time.

During the calamitous third century, the frontier was overwhelmed by barbarian 
invasions. But, generally speaking, the frontier affected broadly the same swath of 
regions running southeast from present-day Netherlands to Romania. The regions 
classified as "frontier" during 0-500 c.E. are SBR, NED, NFR, EFR, WGE, SGE, 
BOH, AUS, HUN, TRA, VLH, BUL, BYZ, MOL, and ZAP (see Figure 5.1).

The presence of a single empire during this period makes construction of the 
statistical test straightforward. I simply use the frontier regions during the first 
half millennium, and observe whether there is a correlation with large polities 
originating from these regions and reaching their maximum size during the second 
half millennium (500-1000 C.E.). The temporal separation is determined by the 
direction of causation (frontiers must temporally precede empires). The separating 
date, 500 c.E., is convenient because it is very close to the date of collapse of the 
western Roman Empire. The results are summarized in Table 5.1.

The overall pattern documented in Table 5.1 confirms the predictions of the 
metaethnic frontier theory: the overwhelming majority of cases are concentrated 
in the categories "no frontier, no empire" and "frontier and empire." The statistical 
test indicates that the probability of this outcome occurring by chance alone is 
vanishingly small. Now that we have an overview of the pattern, let us delve into 
some specifics.

A Quick Overview of the Ethnopolitical History of Europe during the 
First Millennium 
The Roman frontier in Europe had three fairly distinct segments: two in the flat 
terrain separated by one in a rugged area. The first flat segment stretched along 
Table 5.1 Results of the empirical test of the frontier model: (a) Europe 0-1000 c.E.

Test of independence (Sokal and Rohlf 1981:737): Gadi = 27.1, P « 0.001. (b) Europe 
1000-1900 c.E. Test of independence: Gadi = 22.0, P « 0.001.

No empire 
Empire 
No empire 
Empire 
(a) 0-1000 C.E.

No frontier Frontier 
34 
1 
4 
ll 
(b) 1000--1900 C.E.

No Frontier Frontier 
19 
3 
6 
22 
the Rhine north of the Jura and Vosges mountains, where it runs through the north 
European plain (I will return to this area in Section 9.1.1). The rugged segment 
of the frontier was situated north of the Alps. It was crosscut by the foothills of 
the Alps, as well as by smaller chains of mountains and hills: the Jura, Bavarian/Bohemian forest, the Sudetes, and the Tatras. The last flat segment, along the 
Danube river, itself consisted of two pieces: the Hungarian and, beyond the Transylvanian Alps, the Wallachian plain. The Wallachian plain merges smoothly into 
the coastal lowlands of the Black Sea, running from Constantinople/Stambul to 
the Dnieper and beyond (the latter area will be discussed in Section 9.2.1). This 
whole segment of the frontier, including the Hungarian plain, can be thought of 
as a western extention of the great Eurasian steppe.

In Section 4.1.2 I advanced the hypothesis that rugged terrain has an inhibiting 
effect on asabiya increase. Thus, we should expect large polities forming along 
the flat segments of the Roman frontier. This is precisely what happened. The 
largest European polity of the first millennium (for a complete list of polities, 
see the Appendix) was the Frankish Empire, whose territory reached a peak of 
roughly 1.8 Mm2 during the reign of Charlemagne. Smaller Germanic states and 
chiefdoms, forming in the same general area, include the Burgundian Kingdom 
and the Duchies of the Alamanni, Thuringians, and Saxons. Across the English 
Channel, a similar development took place, albeit on a smaller scale, with Wessex, 
Mercia, and Northumbria eventually merging into England.

The second largest empire in Europe (or, more precisely, in western Eurasia) 
during the first millennium was Byzantium (I Mm2 in 970 c.E.). The Byzantine 
empire presents a fascinating historical puzzle, usually posed as follows: why 
did the eastern Roman Empire survive the collapse of the western Empire, and 
then thrive for another thousand years? The metaethnic frontier theory proposes a 
solution to this puzzle. Beginning in the third and until the tenth century, the area 
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 85 
around Byzantium-Constantinople became the imperial frontier. Once the invader 
from the north crosses the Danube, there are no significant geographic barriers 
between it and Constantinople. Furthermore, the area around Constantinople is 
vulnerable to sea-based raiding. As a result, it was repeatedly raided and invaded, 
and Constantinople was besieged by a succession of barbarian hordes, such as 
the Goths, Huns, Slavs, Avars, Bulgars, and Arabs. Furthermore, from the fourth 
century and until the conversion of the Bulgars in 863-900 c.E., the frontier 
coincided with a metaethnic fault line between Christianity and Paganism.

As I discussed in Chapter 4, a new empire can be born on either the imperial or 
the tribal side of the old empire's frontier. In the case of the lower Danube frontier, 
both sides gave rise to empires. Turkic-speaking nomads and Slavic-speaking 
agriculturalists merged into a new Bulgarian ethnie north of the frontier, while 
another new ethnie, the Byzantines, formed south of the frontier. The case for the 
Byzantines as a new ethnie, I believe, is quite strong. Certainly, the Byzantines 
