slowed by periodic state breakdown, but this effect is slight. Numerical investigation of the model parameters indicates that commoner population declines are 
more pronounced when we increase the elite extraction ability (by increasing the 
parameter E, the maximum proportion of commoner production that can be extracted by elites). Additionally, the cycle period is lengthened and the amplitude 
of commoner oscillation is increased when we decrease the per capita rate of 
elite reproduction. This happens because longer cycles mean longer periods of 
very intense exploitation of commoners by elites, resulting in a greater decline 
of commoner populations by the end of the cycle. A sample trajectory for E = 1 
and r max = 0.02 is shown in Figure 7 .Sb.

The Parasitic Nomad Model 
The last model that I develop in this section is tailored to the situation on the 
Inner Asian frontier of China, as conceptualized by Barfield (1989) and further 
developed by Kradin (2000, 2002). This model is in many ways similar to the 
lbn Khaldun model. Again, I focus on the dynamics of nomadic elites (chiefs of 
various ranks and their kin). Contrary to the Maghrebin situation, however, the 
nomads of the Inner Asian frontier preferred not to conquer the civilized state, 
the Chinese Empire, but to extort tribute from it.

Here is the verbal description of the model (the equations are in the Appendix).

Let R be the amount of tribute extracted from the Chinese in a particular year (R 
is a variable whose dependence on other variables in the model will be explained 
below). Let E be the elite numbers. Thus, the elite per capita income is JL = R/E.

The elite population dynamics are modeled exactly as in the lbn Khaldun model 
(that is, the elite per capita rate of population change is proportional to JL- JLo, 
where JLo is the income level necessary to maintain and replace a member of the 
elite).

The second structural variable of the model, in addition to E, is S, the asabiya 
of nomadic elites at the highest organizational level, that of the "imperial confederation." I assume that the asabiya of lower-scale groups is fixed at a high level, 
typical of nomadic life, so that we do not have to model it explicitly. The process 
leading to the rise of imperial confederation is conceptualized as follows. Initially, the steppe is divided among numerous "tribes" (nomadic chiefdoms). One 
particular tribe, through advantageous location, a rise of a charismatic leader, or 
simply luck, acquires an enhanced ability to extract booty or tribute from the 
agrarian polity on the other side of the steppe frontier. Using the goods extracted 
from settled agriculturalists, the tribal chief increases his warrior retinue. This 
sets in motion a positive feedback dynamic: greater retinue allows the chief to 
conquer nearby nomadic tribes, incorporate them into the growing steppe army, 
extract a greater booty/tribute from the agrarian state, attract more warriors, and 
so on. An imperial steppe confederation is the result. This autocatalytic process 
runs on until it hits the upper limit of what can be extracted from the agrarian 
state (remember that the canny nomads do not wish to conquer the agrarian state 
but just milk it for what the traffic can bear).

Specifically, I assume that the amount of tribute, R, is a nonlinear function 
of E: first, it rises with E in an accelerating manner, but then approaches an 
upper asymptote. R is also proportional to the confederation-level asabiya, S. S 
initially starts at a high level, and as long as the amount of tribute per elite head 
is abundant, it stays constant (S = 0). However, if the per capita income, ,.,, falls 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUGURAL THEORY 137 
below some minimum level deemed appropriate, J.Lmin• intraelite competition is 
intensified. This has a corrosive effect on the asabiya, and S declines.

Typical dynamics of the parasitic nomad model are shown in Figure 7 .4b. The 
causes underlying the rise of imperial confederations have been explained above.

The reason that confederations fail is, in a way, the same dynamic, but running 
in reverse. When the imperial confederation achieves the maximum extraction 
rate, its territorial growth stops, but elite numbers continue to grow as a result 
of the natural population increase of elites. When elite numbers reach the point 
where JL > J.Lmin• S begins to decline (Figure 7.4b). Declining S lowers the ability to extract tribute from the agrarian state, which further exacerbates intraelite 
competition. Eventually, S hits some lower threshold, below which the imperial 
confederation cannot be held together. The confederation dissolves into a number 
of warring tribes, and the cycle can begin again. Because the tribe-level asabiya 
remains high, the preconditions for the rise of another confederation are created 
immediately upon the collapse of the previous one (thus, the model assumes that 
the next cycle begins right away).

7 .2.4 Models for the Chinese Dynastic Cycle 
Historians have long noticed the importance of the dynastic cycle in Chinese 
history (Meskill 1965). During the early phase of the dynastic cycle, peace and 
prosperity reign, and population tends to increase. Eventually, however, the dynasty becomes "old and feeble," corruption and public disorder increase, and the 
dynasty falls. During the ensuing period of anarchy, the population usually declines. Two similar models of the dynastic cycle have been proposed, one by the 
economist Dan Usher (1989), and the other by the economist Cyrus Chu and the 
demographer Ronald Lee (Chu and Lee 1994). Because Usher's model is rather 
complex (having twenty equations), I do not discuss it here, but turn instead to 
the simpler model of Chu and Lee.

There are three classes in the Chu and Lee model: peasants grow food and pay 
taxes, bandits steal food and fight peasants and rulers, and self-interested rulers 
tax farmers and hunt bandits. Food production is increased by extra labor inputs, 
but this increase is subject to diminishing returns. Peasants have a choice: they can 
stay peasants and farm, or they can turn into bandits and steal. This occupational 
decision is based on comparison of the expected utility of bandits and peasants.

The utility function is the product of food received and probability of survival.

Chu and Lee show that one effect of a larger population is to increase the rate 
with which peasants turn into bandits. When the number of bandits increases, it 
has two consequences. First, there are fewer peasants, and thus food production 
is decreased. This leads to population decrease due to higher child mortality.

Additionally, a greater number of bandits means increased risk of death to adults.

Second, the growing ranks of bandits improve their survival probability, which 
causes their population to increase. At some point, the bandit power overwhelms 
that of the government, and the dynasty collapses.

Assessment 
