appreciable lag, cannot cause a dynamical system to oscillate. They can only 
cause it to return asymptotically to an equilibrium, if a stable equilibrium exists 
(if it does not, then the system will run away to ±oo ). In order for oscillations 
to arise, a negative feedback must operate with a delay. We model such slow 
feedbacks either explicitly, by adding other structural variables to the differential 
equation model, or implicitly by using discrete-time (difference) models.

2.1.3 Boom/Bust Dynamics and Sustained Oscillations 
In order to model rise/fall dynamics of X with differential equations, we need 
to identify another structural variable, call it Y, which is affected by X and, in 
turn, itself affects X. Thus, X is affected by a negative feedback loop that is 
mediated by Y. Consider the following simple biological model of a population 
of consumers living on a nonrenewable resource: 
X=caXY-dX 
Y=-aXY (2.6) 
where X is the number of consumers at time t and Y is the current amount of 
resources. Looking first at the Y equation, we see the term -aXY representing 
the rate of consumption (the minus sign indicates that consumption reduces the 
amount of resources present). Consumption is assumed to be proportional to the 
product of X and Y, for the following reasons. First, more consumers deplete 
resources faster. Second, when resources are plentiful, each individual consumer 
depletes resources faster than when resources are scarce. Turning to the X equation, I assumed that consumers increase in proportion to the amount of resource 
consumed, with c being the constant of proportionality (this is the term caXY).

GEOPOLITICS 13 
Additionally, consumers die off at a rate proportional to X (the proportionality 
constant d is known as the relative or per capita death rate).

The dynamics of this model are illustrated in Figure 2.le. Assuming plentiful 
initial resources, consumers will first increase because their "birth rate" (caXY) 
will exceed the "death rate" (dX). Meanwhile, resources are depleted, and at 
an increasingly faster rate, because consumers are becoming more and more numerous. Eventually, resources fall beyond the point where consumer birth rate 
exceeds death rate, and the consumers start declining. Since consumers are still 
depleting resources, even during the decline phase, there is no end to the collapse: 
X will keep decreasing to 0. The boom is inevitably followed by the bust.

It is very easy to modify Model (2.6) to cause it to go through repeated 
boom/bust cycles. For example, we can add the assumption that the resource 
is renewable, and grows exponentially in the absence of consumers. Adding the 
exponential growth term bY to the second equation, we have 
X=caXY-dX 
Y=-aXY+bY (2.7) 
This is the famous Lotka-Volterra model of predator-prey cycles (a typical trajectory of X is shown in Figure 2.lf).

Second- and higher-order differential models (models with two or more 
structural variables) are capable of very diverse kinds of dynamic behaviors.

They can have a stable equilibrium, approached either monotonically (as in 
one-dimensional models) or in an oscillatory fashion. They can exhibit stable 
cycles, characterized by a certain period and amplitude. Models with three or 
more structural variables can oscillate chaotically (predicting irregular-looking 
dynamics) or quasiperiodically (two or more cycle periods superimposed on 
each other). There are many kinds of fascinating mathematical phenomena, 
but we do not need to be concerned with them in the investigation of social 
dynamics, at least not for a long time yet. The important general class of 
dynamics for our purposes is second-order oscillations. Whether they are limit 
cycles, quasiperiodicity, or chaos is not critical at the current state of the art.

The important feature, which distinguishes them from first-order dynamics, is 
sustained periods of increase followed by sustained periods of decline.

One further important result from nonlinear dynamic theory is that there is 
a close relationship between the time scales at which negative feedback loops 
operate (how fast they are) and the time scale of the dynamics (for example, 
the average period of oscillations). In differential equation models such as (2.7), 
the speed with which negative feedback acts is explicitly related to parameter 
values of the model, typically those whose units are [time] or [time]-1• In the 
Lotka-Volterra model, there are two parameters whose units are [time]-1: d and 
b. The parameter d measures how fast the numbers of consumers would (exponentially) decline in the absence of resource; b, analogously, measures how fast 
resources would (exponentially) increase in the absence of consumers. These two 
parameters determine the periodicity with which the consumer-resource system 
oscillates. In fact, the period is inversely related to the geometric mean of b and 
d (for the mathematically inquisitive: the period of oscillations near the neutrally 
stable equilibrium is 21T I ../iid). Thus, the faster consumer and resource populations change in time, the shorter is the oscillation period. In models more complex 
than the Lotka-Volterra model the formula for the period is more complicated, 
but the qualitative insight carries over: faster feedbacks cause faster oscillations 
(and if feedbacks are too fast, then we cannot even obtain oscillations, because 
dynamics tend to be stabilized by very fast feedback mechanisms).

2.1.4 Implications for Historical Dynamics 
Our discussion of dynamics, so far, has focused exclusively on endogenous factors-variables that participate in dynamic feedbacks. In a purely endogenous 
system any fluctuations are solely a result of the interaction of endogenous variables; such systems are "closed" with respect to influences from outside. Historical social systems, by contrast, should always be affected by outside forces: 
climate fluctuations causing crop failure, sudden appearance of new epidemics, 
hostile invasions, spread of new religions, and so on. Factors that influence a 
dynamical system, but are not themselves influenced by its variables, are called 
exogenous. The distinction between endogenous and exogenous factors is not 
sharp, and usually depends on the questions we choose. For example, if we are 
focused on the internal dynamics of a single polity, then we will model invasion 
by other polities as an exogenous factor. But if we decide to expand the model 
to cover the dynamics of the whole system of interacting states, or the worldsystem (Wallerstein 1974; Chase-Dunn and Hall 1997), then invasion occurrence 
is endogenized.

The open property of historical social systems presents no problem to the 
dynamical systems approach. The most natural way to model such influences is 
to add an exogenous structural variable to the system of equations. For example, 
if we already have endogenous variables X and Y, and add an exogenous variable 
Z, then the equations look something like 
X=f(X, Y,Z) 
Y=g(X, Y,Z} 
i = h(t) 
