population density and/or greater complexity than the other (Chase-Dunn and 
Hall 2000:91). Chase-Dunn and Hall further conceptualize the semiperiphery as 
those regions that are spatially located between core and peripheral regions, or 
between two competing core regions. Alternatively, semiperipheries may mix core 
and periphery forms of organization, or be intermediate in form between those 
forms found in the adjacent core and peripheral areas.

Chase-Dunn and Hall argue that "semiperiphery is fertile ground for social, 
organizational, and technical innovation and is advantageous location for the establishment of new centers of power. In particular, secondary state formation 
on the marches of empires has frequently been recognized as a semiperipheral 
phenomenon that is related to the rise and fall of empires" (2000:96).

There are some striking parallels between the Chase-Dunn and Hall theory and 
the one advanced in this chapter. However, I argue that the theory of semiperipheral marcher states has not yet been formalized to the point where it could be 
submitted to a rigorous empirical test. The first problem is that a region can be 
designated as semiperipheral either because of its spatial location, or because it 
has institutional forms intermediate between core and periphery. In other words, 
the definition is too broad, and too many polities could be classified as semiperipheral. The second and related problem is that the theory of Chase-Durin and 
Hall does not resolve the issue of why some semiperipheral challengers succeed 
and others do not (Chase-Dunn and Hall 1997:98). By contrast, the metaethnic 
frontier theory makes much sharper predictions, and thus has a higher falsifiability potential. It essentially says that only those semiperipheries where imperial 
frontiers coincide with metaethnic fault lines should be the sources of aggressive challenger states. Furthermore, the more intense the ethnic differential and 
the longer the frontier occupies a region, the more likely it is that a challenger 
would emerge and be successful at building a large territorial empire. The empirical issue thus becomes whether the metaethnic frontier theory captures all 
cases of empires starting as semiperipheral marcher states, or whether there are 
semiperipheral states that gain their ability for territorial expansion by some other 
mechanism.

Ethnogenesis 
While theoretical ethnology languished in the West after World War 11, in the 
Soviet Union, by contrast, ethnology was a respected and productive direction of 
research. I have already discussed the original (although, in my opinion, deeply 
flawed) theory of ethnogenesis advanced by Gumilev (1971). But there was a 
great variety of other ethnological research in Russia, both theoretical and empirical. For a review of one influential school of research on ethnosocial processes, 
see Bromley (1987; Bromley and Kozlov 1989). Several studies examined the 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 63 
processes involved specifically in ethnogenesis {Alekseeva 1973; Alekseev 1986).

Russian ethnology continues to evince a heightened interest in the problems of 
social and historical ethnology (Arutyunov 1989; Lurie 1998).

In recent years, researchers in western Europe and North America have also become interested in the problems of ethnogenesis. A particularly fruitful research 
program is taking shape in the study of the ethnogeneses of various Germanic 
peoples at the time of the later Roman Empire (Wolfram and Pohl 1990; Heather 
1996; Hummer 1998). However, origins of other ethnies are examined with an increasing frequency (Roosens 1989; Emberling 1995; Hudson 1999; Moore 2001).

Not all social scientists, however, are sanguine about the term "ethnogenesis," because of its connotation of "origin" (see the discussion by Ausenda in Hummer 
1998:21).

The connection between frontiers and ethnogenesis has not escaped the attention of various authors. A very interesting study of the relationship between 
frontiers and ethnic identity is that of Armstrong (1982). A series of papers in the 
Journal of World History presented several case studies of frontier ethnogenesis 
{Chapell 1993a,b; Miller 1993; Mulroy 1994).

A very interesting perspective that merges the ideas of frontier ethnogenesis 
and core-periphery interaction is offered by Hall (2000, 2001). Hall defines a 
frontier as a region or zone where two or more distinct cultures, societies, ethnic 
groups, or modes of production come into contact. Contact often leads to conflict, 
and attempts by some groups to incorporate others across the frontier. Attempted 
incorporation and resistance against it exert tremendous pressure on both the incorporated people and the incorporating system. "These interactions also reshape 
the ethnic landscape. Frontiers are zones where ethnogenesis, ethnocide, culturicide, and genocide are common" (Hall2000:241). Hall illustrates these processes 
with the example of Navajo (Dine) ethnogenesis. Navajo groups prior to the arrival of Europeans shared language, customs, and a vague sense of being the 
same people. However, Dine-wide institutions such as the Navajo Tribal Council 
developed as a result of frontier conditions. A consolidated Navajo ethnie began 
to form over the centuries of interaction between the Navajo and the Spaniards, 
and finally took shape under the American occupation (Hall 2001:260).

4.2 MATHEMATICAL THEORY 
The theory that I advanced in the previous section is formulated verbally. It 
seems plausible that the waxings and wanings of asabiya could underlie imperial 
cycles, but we are dealing with dynamical systems, and intuition based on verbal 
reasoning can mislead. For example, it is possible that when we translate the 
verbal assumptions into a mathematical model, we do not get the expected boombust cycles, but some other dynamics. Thus, we need to make sure that our verbal 
reasoning did not mislead us.

Frontiers are inherently spatial quantities, and the mathematical theory that we 
will build must eventually include space in an explicit way. However, explicitly 
spatial models are more difficult to analyze and typically require numerical solutions or computer simulations. It is often useful to attempt to capture the main 
interactions postulated by theory with a simplified pseudospatial model that is 
much more transparent to analysis. This is the strategy that I pursue. First, I 
develop a very simple pseudospatial model and determine what it tells us about 
the dynamic relationship between empires and frontiers (Section 4.2.1 ). Second, 
I construct a spatially explicit simulation to make sure that the insights from the 
simpler model hold in a more complex setting (Section 4.2.2).

4.2.1 A Simple Analytical Model 
In Section 2.2.2 I analyzed a simple geopolitical model (2.12) of territorial dynamics in one-dimensional space. Setting y = 1 (since we are not interested in the 
effects of position) and employing the approximation exp[x] = 1 +x, suggested 
in Section 2.2.2, we have the following equation for the territorial dynamics: 
A=cA(1-A/h)-a (4.1) 
The parameter c translates the state's resources into its geopolitical power, h is 
the spatial scale of power projection, and a is the geopolitical pressure from the 
hinterland (assumed to be a constant).

Model (2.12) assumes that a polity's power is proportional to the amount of its 
resources (eA). The "resources" primarily refer to the state's human resources, 
since it is the population that pays taxes and produces recruits who are necessary 
for territorial defense and expansion. As I argued in the previous chapter, however, 
the success of a state is a result of collective action. No matter how many subjects 
an empire has, if they cannot, or will not, work together, the imperial power is 
