we are going to address in this research program. I chose to focus on territorial 
dynamics of polities, for the following reasons. Much of recorded history is concerned with territorial expansion of one polity at the expense of others, typically 
accomplished by war. Why some polities expand and others fail to do so is a 
big, important question in history, judging, for example, by the number of books 
written about the rise and fall of empires. Furthermore, the spatiotemporal record 
of territorial state dynamics is perhaps one of the best quantitative data sets available to the researcher. For example, the computer-based atlas CENTENNIA (Reed 
1996) provides a continuous record of territorial changes during 1000-2000 c.E.

in Europe, Middle East, and Northern Africa. Having such data is invaluable to 
the research program described in this book, because it can provide a primary 
data set with which predictions of various models can be compared.

The dynamic aspect of state territories is also an important factor. As I argued in the previous section, dynamic phenomena are particularly difficult to 
study without a formal mathematical apparatus. Thus, if we wish to develop a 
mathematical theory for history, we should choose those phenomena where mathematical models have the greatest potential for nontrivial insights.

Territorial dynamics is not the whole of history, but it is one of the central 
aspects of it, in two senses. First, we need to invoke a variety of social mechanisms to explain territorial dynamics, including military, political, economic, 
and ideological processes. Thus, by focusing on territorial change we are by 
no means going to be exclusively concerned with military and political history.

Second, characteristics of the state, such as its internal stability and wealth of 
ruling elites, are themselves important variables explaining many other aspects of 
history, for example, the development of arts, philosophy, and science.

1.2.2 A Focus on Agrarian Polities 
There are many kinds of polities, ranging from bands of hunter-gatherers to the 
modem postindustrial states. A focus on particular socioeconomic formation is 
necessary if we are to make progress. The disadvantages of industrial and postindustrial polities are that the pace of change has become quite rapid and the 
societies have become very complex (measured, for example, by the number of 
different professions). Additionally, we are too close to these societies, making 
it harder for us to study them objectively. The main disadvantage of studying 
hunter-gatherer societies, on the other hand, is that we have to rely primarily 
on archaeological data. Agrarian societies appear to suffer the least from these 
two disadvantages: throughout most of their history they changed at a reasonably 
slow pace, and we have good historical records for many of them. In fact, more 
STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 5 
than 95% of recorded history is the history of agrarian societies. As an additional 
narrowing of the focus for this book, I will say little about nomadic pastoralist 
societies and leave out of consideration thalassocratic city-states (however, both 
kinds of polities are very important, and will be dealt with elsewhere).

This leaves us still with a huge portion of human history, roughly extending 
from -4000 to 1800 or 1900 c.E.,1 depending on the region. One region to which 
I will pay much attention is Europe during the period 500--1900 c.E., with occasional excursions to China. But the theory is meant to apply to all agrarian 
polities, and the aim is to test it eventually in other regions of the world.

1.2.3 The Hierarchical Modeling Approach 
There is a heuristic "rule of thumb" in modeling dynamical systems: do not attempt to encompass in your model more than two hierarchical levels. A model 
that violates this rule is the one that attempts to model the dynamics of both interacting subsystems within the system and interactions of subsubsystems within 
each subsystem. Using an individual-based simulation to model interstate dynamics also violates this rule (unless, perhaps, we model simple chiefdoms). From 
the practical point of view, even powerful computers take a long time to simulate 
systems with millions of agents. More importantly, from the conceptual point of 
view it is very difficult to interpret the results of such a multilevel simulation.

Practice shows that questions involving multilevel systems should be approached 
by separating the issues relevant to each level, or rather pair of levels (the lower 
level provides mechanisms, one level up is where we observe patterns).

Accordingly, in the research program described in this book I consider three 
classes of models. In the first class, individuals (or, perhaps, individual households) interact together to determine group dynamics. The goal of these models 
is to understand how patterns at the group level arise from individual based mechanisms. In the second class, we build on group-level mechanisms to understand 
the patterns arising at the polity level. Finally, the third class of models addresses 
how polities interact at the interstate level. The greatest emphasis will be on the 
second class of models (groups-polity). I realize that this sounds rather abstract 
at this point; in particular, what do I mean by "groups"? The discussion of this 
important issue is deferred until chapter 3. Also, I do not wish to be too dogmatic 
about following the rule of two levels. When we find it too restrictive, we should 
break it; the main point is not to do it unless really necessary.

1.2.4 Mathematical Framework 
The hard part of theory building is choosing the mechanisms that will be modeled, making assumptions about how different subsystems interact, choosing functional forms, and estimating parameters. Once all that work is done, obtaining 
model predictions is conceptually straightforward, although technical, laborious, 
'Negative sign refers to years B.C.E.

and ti~e consuming. For simpler models, we may have analytical solutions available (to solve a model analytically means to derive a formula that gives a precise solution for all parameter values). However, once the model reaches even a 
medium level of complexity we typically must use a second method: solving it 
numerically on the computer. A third approach is to use agent-based simulations 
(Kohler and Gumerman 2000). These ways of obtaining model predictions should 
not be considered as strict alternatives. On the contrary, a mature theory employs 
all three approaches synergistically.

Agent-based simulation (ABS), for example, is a very powerful tool for investigating emerging properties of a society consisting of individuals who are assumed 
to behave in a certain way (by redefining agents to mean groups of individuals 
or whole polities, we can also use this approach to address higher-level issues).

Agent-based models are easily expandable, we can add various stochastic factors, 
and in general model any conceivable mechanisms. In principle, it is possible 
to build a theory by using only agent-based simulations. In practice, however, a 
sole emphasis on these kinds of models is a poor approach. One practical limitation is that currently available computing power, while impressive, is not infinite, 
putting a limit on how much complexity we can handle in an agent-based simulation. More importantly, ABSs have conceptual drawbacks. Currently, there is 
no unified language for describing ABSs, making each particular model opaque 
to everybody except those who are steeped in the particular computer language 
the model is implemented in. Small details of implementation may result in big 
differences in the predicted dynamics, and only in very rare cases do practitioners 
working with different languages bother to cross-translate their ADS (for a rare 
exception, see Axelrod 1997). And, finally, the power of ABSs is at the same 
time their curse: it is too easy to keep adding components to these models, and 
very soon they become too complex to understand.

