may be disguised as increased child mortality.

Political instability can also affect the carrying capacity. There are many mechanisms by which the state can increase carrying capacity, so I will mention just 
two of the most common ones. First, the state offers protection. In a stateless society people can live only in natural strongholds, or places that can be made defensible. Examples include hillfort chiefdoms in preconquest Peru (Earle 1997), and 
the movement of settlements to hilltops in Italy after the collapse of the Roman 
Empire (Wickham 1981 ). Fearful of attack, people can cultivate only the small 
proportion of the productive area that is near fortified settlements. The strong 
state protects the productive population from external and internal (banditry, civil 
war) threats, and thus allows the whole cultivable area to be put into production.

The second general mechanism is that states often invest in increasing agricultural productivity by constructing irrigation canals and roads, by implementing 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 121 
flood control measures, by clearing land from forests, etc. Again, the end result 
of these measures is an increase in the number of people that can be gainfully 
employed growing food, e.g., the carrying capacity.

In summary, political instability can negatively affect both demographic rates 
and the productive capacity of the society. I will explore both mechanisms in the 
models developed below. To reiterate, my goal is a theory in which population 
dynamics is an endogenous process: not only is there a link between population 
growth and state breakdown, but there may be a feedback connection between 
state breakdown and population growth.

7.2 MATHEMATICAL THEORY 
7.2.1 The Basic Demographic-Fiscal Model 
Model Development 
I begin with the simplest possible model of agrarian state collapse. My purpose 
is first to expose the most basic logical blocks of the argument, and only then 
to start adding real-life complexities to it. In this section I will ask the reader 
to work through the model derivation and analysis with me, because the math is 
very simple, but at the same time crucial for understanding the main result. In 
the following sections, math will be banished to the Appendix.

There are two variables in the model, one for the population and the other 
for the state. N ( t) is the population density of subjects at time t. I assume that 
the state area does not change, so the density is simply the population number 
divided by the area. Thus, the units of N could be individuals per km2 • S(t) is 
the current accumulated state resources, which I measure in kilograms (or tons) 
of grain. The choice of this particular variable is based on the economic nature 
of the agrarian state, in which food is the main commodity produced.

To start deriving the equations connecting the two structural variables (N 
and S), I first assume that the per capita rate of surplus production is a declining function of population numbers (this is David Ricardo's law of diminishing 
returns). There are several socioecological mechanisms that underly this relationship. First, as population grows, the stock of the most fertile land is exhausted, and 
increasingly more marginal plots are brought into cultivation. Second, increased 
population growth also means that land is subdivided into smaller parcels. Although each parcel receives more labor, its production rate (kg grain per ha per 
year) is also subject to the law of diminishing returns.

For the purpose of simplicity, I will approximate the relationship between per 
capita rate of surplus production, p, and population numbers, N, with a linear 
function 
p(N) = c1 (1- N /k) 
Here c1 is some proportionality constant, and k is the population size at which 
the surplus equals zero. Thus, for N > k, the surplus is negative (the population 
produces less food than is needed to sustain it).

Next I assume that population dynamics are Malthusian: 
N=rN 
and that the per capita rate of population increase is a linear function of the 
per capita rate of surplus production, r = c2p(N). Putting together these two 
assumptions, we arrive at a logistic model for population growth: 
N = r0N(l- N /k) (7.1) 
where r0 = c1 c2 is the intrinsic rate of population growth, obtained when N is 
near 0. The parameter k is now seen as the "carrying capacity," or equilibrial 
population size. When N < k, the society generates surplus, and the population 
grows. If N > k, then the society produces less food than is needed for households 
to sustain and replace themselves, resulting in population decline.

Turning now to the differential equation for state resources, S, we note that S 
changes as a result of two opposite processes: revenues and expenditures. I will 
assume that the state collects a fixed proportion of surplus production as taxes.

The total rate of surplus production is the product of per capita rate and population numbers. Thus, the taxation rate is c3p(N)N, where c3 is the proportion of 
surplus collected as taxes. State expenditures are assumed to be proportional to 
the population size. The reason for this assumption is that, as population grows, 
the state must spend more resources on the army to protect and police it, on 
bureaucracy to collect and administer taxes, and on various public works (public 
buildings, roads, irrigation canals, etc ). Putting together these processes we have 
the following equation forS: 
(7.2) 
where p0 = c1 c3 is the per capita taxation rate at low population density and p 
the per capita state expenditure rate.

We are not done yet. Although we have established the dynamic link from N 
to S, there is no feedback effect (from S to N) in the model. I assume that the 
strong state has a positive effect on population dynamics; specifically, it increases 
k, the sustainable population size given the ecological conditions and the current 
development of agricultural technology, as discussed in the previous section.

Thus, the carrying capacity k is a monotonically increasing function of S.

However, k cannot increase without bound. No matter how high S is, at some 
point all potential land is brought into cultivation, and all potential improvements 
have been put in place. Thus, there must be some maximum kmax, given the historically current level of agricultural technology. Another way of thinking about 
this mechanism is that the return on capital investment is also subject to a law of 
diminishing returns. I assume the following specific functional form for k(S): 
k(S) = k0 (t +c-S-) (7.3) s0+S 
:ne parameter k0 is the carrying capacity of the stateless society, c = kmax - k0 
1s the maximum possible gain in increasing k given unlimited funds, and s0 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 123 
