proportion in the periphery. The rate of switching from the core is determined 
analogously. Thus, the rate of change of C is 
Defining r = r0 - r1 and substituting it in the equation above, we have 
C= rC(l-C) (6.2) 
We see that this derivation led us to the logistic equation-another elementary 
model of growth discussed in Section 2.1. This model is even simpler than the 
full noninteractive model that had two rate parameters, p0 and p1• In this model, 
we need to know only one parameter, the difference between the two relative 
rates, r.

The dynamics of equation (6.2) differ from the noninteractive model in one 
important respect: when C is at low levels, it will grow at an accelerating rate.

The reason for the accelerating pattern of growth is that the more people have 
converted or assimilated, the more probable it is that any particular individual will 
switch identity. Such a dynamic pattern is analogous to autocatalytic reaction in 
chemical kinetics, in which the presence of a compound increases the rate at 
which it is created. Accordingly, I will refer to equation (6.2) as the autocatalytic 
model.

Another way in which the noninteractive and autocatalytic models differ is 
that the equilibrium that C approaches in the autocatalytic model is 1 (assuming 
that r > 0), whereas in the noninteractive model the equilibrium can be substantially less than 1. This difference alone should make us suspect the noninteractive 
model. Why should core individuals continue switching to the peripheral identity 
when the core identity has reached overwhelming proportions? Yet that is precisely what the noninteractive model suggests. Clearly, core individuals switching 
to the peripheral identity should occur only in locations where P » C, as happened in the Anglo-Irish example mentioned above.

The Threshold Model 
Making the probability of switching a function of proportion in the core ethnie 
was a step in the right direction. However, we assumed that the relationship 
between p and C was linear (p = rC), and it is a good idea to investigate what 
will happen if we relax this assumption. A particular class of nonlinear behaviors, 
threshold models of collective behavior (Granovetter 1978; Schelling 1978), has 
been extensively discussed in the sociological literature. Particularly important to 
the issue at hand is that it has also been applied to the problem of switching 
ethnic identity (Laitin 1998).

We can model threshold behavior by modifying the previously assumed linear 
relationship between p and C to a nonlinear one of the form p = rC(C- C0).

The new parameter, C0 , is the threshold proportion. When C > C0, the rate of 
switching to the core identity is positive, because the core ethnie has achieved 
the "critical mass." When C < C0 , the rate of switching is negative. That is, more 
individuals are switching from core to peripheral identity than vice versa (in other 
words, I interpret p as the difference between the probabilities of switching in 
either direction). The notions of critical mass and threshold behaviors are amply 
discussed by Schelling (1978) and Granovetter (1978), among others, so I do not 
discuss them further here, referring the reader to these authors instead.

Substituting the assumed form of p in the model, we have the following 
equation 
C = rC(C- C0)(1- C) (6.3) 
The threshold model belongs to the class of metastable dynamics (Section 2.1.2).

It has three equilibria: two stable C = 0 and C = 1, and one unstable C = C0 • 
The outcome of the ethnic assimilation process is entirely dependent on the initial 
conditions. If C starts above C0 , then the trajectory eventually approaches 1. In 
other words, all the population of the empire acquires the core identity. Alternatively, if C starts below C0 , then the peripheral identity will win in the end, and 
all core ethnics lose their original identity. This is an interesting prediction of the 
threshold model, and it seems to fit the many historical cases when a small group 
of invaders conquered a much larger ethnically different population. Often the invaders would proceed to convert to the dominant religion of the conquered people 
and switch to speaking their language (examples are the Visigoths, Langobards, 
Bulgars, and Normans).

There is one feature of the threshold model that is problematic: its dynamics are 
determined by whether the global frequency is above or below the threshold, yet 
it is more plausible to assume that an individual probability of switching identity 
should be affected by the local composition of society. The autocatalytic model 
as an approximation of the social network process also suffers from this criticism, 
although, as we shall see below, it still appears to be not a bad approximation, 
even in an explicitly spatial setting (under certain conditions). Adding explicit 
space to the threshold model, on the other hand, may substantially change its 
predicted dynamics. This is the next issue that we need to investigate.

ETHNOKINETICS 99 
6.2.2 Spatially Explicit Models 
As I have repeatedly stressed in this book, there are many advantages of developing mathematical models. One such advantage is that when we derive a specific 
model for some issue, we may find that it is mathematically exactly the same as 
some equations developed to model a completely different problem. This means 
that we do not have to develop an analytic apparatus from scratch, but can profit 
from what others did before. This is the case with ethnokinetics. The kind of 
models that we formulated in the previous section have been extensively used 
in modeling chemical kinetics, spread of rumors and innovations, dynamics of 
epidemics, and so on. As I argued in the previous section, one key element that 
we need to investigate theoretically is the addition of explicit space. Fortunately, 
there is a very rich theory for the dynamics of both chemical and population 
processes in space (reaction-diffusion theory and epidemiological models), and 
we can use the insights from these mathematical theories for our purposes (for 
a good review of the mathematical theory, see Murray 1993). In the following 
I will mainly rely on results from the theory of epidemics in space, because 
its mathematical formalism fits most closely the kinds of processes we need to 
understand.

Social Space 
When I say that we need to add "space" I do not necessarily mean physical 
space. Rather, what we need is some notion of social space, in which distance 
between individuals is measured by the frequency and intensity of their social 
interactions. The social space has many dimensions, but sociologists often reduce 
them to two principal classes: the vertical and horizontal (Sorokin 1927). The 
vertical dimension refers to the position in the social hierarchy (stratification).
