
This kind of dynamics, predicted by the selfish elite model, is analogous to 
the typical dynamics exhibited by the basic model, except the role of N is now 
played by E. As in the basic model, although the equilibrium is locally stable, it 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 131 
can be perturbed to go for another state building/state collapse excursion (again, 
this is analogous to the dynamics of the basic model).

A single state building/collapse episode followed by a stateless equilibrium 
(in the absence of perturbations) is the dynamics typical for most parameter 
combinations of the selfish elite model. It is also the typical dynamics of the 
class-structured model with S affecting the productive capacity of the society.

For some parameter values, however, the selfish elite model exhibits a third kind 
of behavior, in which the system undergoes stable limit cycles of recurrent state 
building, collapse, a period of anarchy, and then another episode of state building 
(Figure 7 .3b ). One way to move the system from the stable stateless equilibrium 
to recurrent cycles is to increase the elite death rate in the absence of the state.

This modification allows elites to die off rapidly and to a low enough point, which 
creates the conditions for state resources to increase.

One behavior that the selfish elite model does not exhibit is a stable equilibrium 
between peasants and elites with the state present, S > 0. The reason is clear and 
completely analogous to the mechanism operating in the basic demographic-fiscal 
model. If E is at an equilibrium, then E is necessarily zero (the elites have no 
surplus to share with the state). Thus, the state gets no revenues, but still must 
spend on defense, administration, and so on.

One obvious modification of the model that leads to an equilibrium with the 
state present consists of allowing the state to collect a fixed proportion of the 
total product extracted from commoners by elites (rather than a fraction of the 
elite's surplus). With this modification, and for realistic parameter values, P and 
E approach equilibrium, while S stays positive (actually, S grows with time, but 
surely the state will find things to spend this surplus on).

This result, however, poses an interesting question. How realistic is it to assume that, during the periods when the elites experience a substantial degree of 
hardship, they will allow a large proportion of revenue to go to the state? Note 
that this model assumes that, even when the economic position of the elites is so 
desperate that their numbers are declining, they will still not attempt to dip into 
the flow of taxes from peasants to the state treasury. In most agrarian societies 
the elites were the ones who administered tax collection. It is likely that most 
elites will feel a greater degree of solidarity with their family and clan, rather 
than with the whole polity. Thus, I think that this kind of "selfless elite" model 
is not a particularly realistic description of most historical agrarian states.

7 .2.3 Models for Elite Cycles 
The models discussed in Section 7 .2.2 indicate that the predicted dynamics are 
primarily determined by the assumptions we make about the elites. This theoretical result supports the argument that the elites play the key role in state 
breakdown (Goldstone 199lb; see Section 7.1).

In this section I continue the investigation of how elite characteristics affect 
polity dynamics. I am interested, in particular, in how nomadic elites, or elites 
originating as nomads, interact with agrarian states. To simplify the matters, I 
initially assume that the population of commoners does not change with time.

However, after investigating the simple model, I check on how its predictions 
are affected by the simplifying assumptions (this is the general procedure that I 
follow in this book).

The lbn Khaldun Model 
The first model that I construct is tailored to the situation in the medieval 
Maghreb, as conceptualized by Ibn Khaldun (what follows is largely a verbal 
description of the model, while the equations are banished to the Appendix).

The dynamics of the Ibn Khaldunian "world-system" are determined by the 
interaction between the civilized society and the desert tribes (Section 3.2.1 ).

The civilized region is the site of recurrent state building/collapse episodes. It is 
inhabited by an indigenous commoner population, who provide the productive 
basis of the society. The desert is inhabited by stateless tribes, who periodically 
conquer the civilized region and establish a ruling dynasty there. Desert tribes, 
thus, supply the elites (nobility) for the civilized state.

In the model I assume that the dynamics of the commoner population are 
largely disconnected from the elite dynamics. Dynasties come and go, but peasants and merchants continue to grow food, trade, and pay taxes to whichever 
government is currently in power. Thus, the amount of resources extracted from 
commoners is a constant, R. During the early years of the dynasty, the extracted 
resources are divided in two parts: taxes to support the government, y R, and rents 
to support the elites, (1- y)R. The parameter y, the proportion of resources going to the state, is assumed to be a constant. The income per noble is therefore 
JL = (1- -y)R/E, where E is the current number of nobles.

I now introduce two other parameters. Let p.0 be the per capita income that is 
necessary to maintain and replace exactly one noble. In other words, when per 
capita income falls below p.0, the elite numbers will decline, while if p. > p.0 , 
then the elite numbers will increase. The second parameter is P.min• the per capita 
income that nobles consider to be the minimum that accords with their station.

This "minimal acceptable income" is determined socially and can vary between 
societies. In general, however, J.l.mjn 2: p.0 , since it is unlikely that nobles would 
consider acceptable an income on which they cannot afford to perpetuate their 
family line to the next generation. lbn Khaldun argued that with time former 
tribesmen forget the rude ways of the desert, and subsequent generations grow 
accustomed to ever-increasing luxury. Thus, P.min is a variable that starts at some 
low level (e.g., p.0) at the beginning of the dynasty and then increases at a certain 
rate (e.g., 8JL per year).

As I stated above, elite numbers increase when per capita income p. is greater 
than p.0• The rate of elite population growth is proportional to the difference 
p. - p.0 , subject to not exceeding the maximum rate of increase, r max. Because the 
