1988; Fischer 1996). Recently, Sergey Nefedov (1999, 2002a) presented data suggesting that secular cycles also occur in several macroregions of Asia (China, the 
Middle East, and India).

Much of the data on population fluctuations with which these authors worked 
is of a fragmentary nature. Nevertheless, several data series of reasonable length 
have been compiled and published in recent years. This development presents us 
with an opportunity to test the predictions of the demographic-structural theory 
by using the formal methods of time-series analysis in order to estimate empirically the periodicity and process order characterizing long-term fluctuations in 
population numbers. Performing such an analysis is the main goal of this chapter.

I begin by discussing how the process order can be estimated from time-series 
data on population dynamics. Next, I apply the statistical approach to the available 
time-series data on historical population dynamics. Finally, I extend the analysis 
to one case study in which we have data on both population numbers and the 
dynamics of sociopolitical instability.

8.2 "SCALE" AND "ORDER" IN HUMAN POPULATION DYNAMICS 
Population ecologists have recently made great strides in modeling, analyzing, 
and explaining the population dynamics of nonhuman organisms. I review these 
1 Note that in this chapter I will not deal with nomadic societies, or societies dominated by nomadic 
elites, whose oscillations are predicted to occur on a faster time scale (Section 7 .2.3).

SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 151 
developments in my book on Complex Population Dynamics (Turchin 2003). Is 
it possible that we can transfer some of the techniques and insights developed 
by population ecologists to the study of human population dynamics? Certainly, 
the set of specific mechanisms that affect human reproduction, mortality, and migration should be very different from those proposed for animals. Many of these 
mechanisms must be economic and sociological in nature, and it seems highly 
unlikely that certain ecological models, e.g. a predator-prey model with humans 
playing the role of prey, would be of use in studying human populations. On the 
other hand, ecological models such as those dealing with resource-consumer or 
disease-host interactions may be quite relevant to understanding the dynamics of 
historic and prehistoric human populations, as long as we do not fall into the trap 
of biologism, by attempting to explain everything solely in biological terms. What 
is important to note here is that population dynamicists have developed a set of 
general approaches to the nonlinear modeling of time-series data coming from 
population systems. These methods do not assume specific ecological models, 
that may or may not apply to human populations. Rather, they provide us with 
tools for quantifying empirical patterns in temporal fluctuations of population 
numbers.

In Section 2.1.4 I introduced the concept of process order. It turns out that 
this concept is very useful in investigations of population dynamics of nonhuman 
organisms (Turchin 2003). However, while order is a readily definable property 
of differential equations (in which context I introduced it in Section 2.1.4), the 
application of this concept to the analysis of time-series data is not completely 
straightforward. The important point is that the order that we estimate from data 
depends on the temporal scale at which population fluctuations are quantified.

Thus, a few remarks are warranted on the temporal scale at which various mechanisms affecting population change operate.

Temporal Scale: Years 
Let us consider four potential time scales: years, decades, centuries, and millennia. The first of these scales, years, is an important pacesetter for the dynamics 
of the resource base of human populations, because usually food gathering and 
production are strongly influenced by seasonal cycles. Additionally, many sources 
of mortality operate on a yearly (or faster) scale. For example, research on the 
dynamics of childhood diseases shows that these historically important sources 
of mortality have their own rhythms: the annual cycle driven by seasonal variation in contact rate (Yorke and London 1973), and a characteristic 2-3 year 
oscillation associated with the nonlinear nature of population interaction between 
infants and the pathogen {Schaffer and Kot 1985). Other sources of mortality that 
should be strongly affected by a seasonal cycle are death as a result of exposure 
to inclement weather and starvation due to seasonal dearth.

Temporal Scale: Decades and Centuries 
The next scale, decades, is the appropriate one for measuring replacement of 
human populations due to reproduction. The important benchmark here is some 
measure of generation time. The reproductive age for human females extends 
from 15 to 45 years of age (Wood 1990). However, the curve of fecundability 
as a function of age is skewed, so that its mode (maximum fertility rate) is at 
roughly 20, while its mean (average age of female at birth) is around 25, and 
in some populations closer to (or even over) 30 years. Certainly, there is a large 
amount of variation in these measures of generation length for humans, depending 
on biological (nutrition, mortality schedules) and social (age at marriage) characteristics of the population. It is clear, though, that for most historical human 
populations generation time should lie in the interval between 20 and 30 years.

General population dynamics theory suggests that population dynamics may 
have oscillatory components falling within three broad classes: generation, firstorder, and second-order cycles (Turchin 2003). Generation cycles are characterized by a period of between 20 and 30 years. These cycles are often found in 
human populations (Keyfitz 1972). They become apparent when population age 
structure is represented as an age pyramid. For example, the age pyramid for the 
current U.S.A. population has clear bulges separated by around 30 years, representing baby boomers and children of baby boomers. Generation cycles are even 
more apparent in the population of present-day Russia, a fact probably explained 
by two huge perturbation& of age structure-World War 1/Civil War and World 
War 11-were separated by roughly one generation time, setting a series of ensuing oscillations. Unlike generation cycles in certain insect populations (Godfray 
and Hassell 1989), however, human generation cycles do not appear to be stable phenomena, and dissipate rather rapidly after a perturbation (Wachter and Lee 
1989). Furthermore, generation cycles are usually expressed as oscillations in age 
structure and have only a weak effect on total numbers.

Unlike generation cycles, which arise as a result of interactions between age 
classes, first-order cycles result from relatively fast density-dependent feedback 
mechanisms. First-order cycles arise most naturally in discrete population models, and have a typical period of two generations (one generation at high density, 
the next at low, and so on). The existence of first-order cycles in human populations was hypothesized by Easterlin (1980). Easterlin suggested that, during the 
twentieth century, U.S. demography was characterized by an alternation of largeand small-cohort generations. A sparse generation enjoys better wages (due to 
labor shortages) and produces many children. The next generation, however, experiences increased competition and produces few children. This mechanism can 
theoretically lead to a typical first-order oscillation with an average period of two 
generations (40-50 years). Although formal models confirm that two-generation 
cycles can in principle occur, in practice the estimates of parameters are such that 
they do not place the model in the cyclic regime (Lee 1974; see also Frauental 
and Swick 1983; Wachter and Lee 1989).

Second-order cycles arise as a result of population size interacting with some 
