the 1570s, the decline of the Russian economy reached catastrophic proportions, 
leading to a massive flight of peasants and urban taxpayers. Population declined 
both in the central region of the Muscovite state and on its northwestern frontier 
(the Novgorodian lands, which were also badly affected by fighting during the 
Livonian war). The result was a huge loss of revenue, both for the state and for 
the service nobility (Dunning 1998).

Political instability affected Russia in two waves. The first period of heightened 
instability was the Oprichnina years of 1565-1572 (Riazanovsky 2000:149-151).

The peculiarity of this period was that it was a coup d'etat lead by the monarch 
himself, using one part of the elite (oprichniki) against the rest. The reign of 
Fedor (1584-1598) was an interlude relatively free of internal conflict, during 
which Russia prosecuted a successful war against Sweden, recovering the lands 
previously ceded to Sweden by the peace treaty of 1583 (Riazanovsky 2000).

However, Fedor's death without a natural successor introduced the second period of instability, the Time of Troubles. During this period, four Tsars ruled 
Russia in rapid succession: Boris and Fedor Godunovs, False Dmitry, and Vasily 
Shuisky, followed by the interregnum of 1610-1613. There were several popular 
uprisings led by dissident elites, foreign interventions of Poland, Sweden, and the 
Crimean Tatars. In short, this was a typical state collapse, proceeding according 
to the demographic-structural scenario. Note that the peaks of the two periods of 
instability, 1570 and 1610, are forty years, or roughly two generations, apart.

The Romanov Wave 
In 1613 Michael Romanov was crowned as Tzar, beginning the 300-year reign 
of the Romanov dynasty. However, the period of instability was not yet completely over. Although Russia did not experience a full-blown state collapse, the 
fiscal health of the state remained shaky throughout Michael's and his successor's 
reigns. It also took a while to recover social stability. In fact, various riots and 
uprisings occurred until the early years of Peter the Great's reign.

Nevertheless, gradually, from the middle of the seventeenth century on, the 
centralizing tendency and associated territorial expansion began to reassert itself, 
beginning with Poland ceding the left-bank Ukraine to Russia in 1667. What 
followed was one of the longest and most successful periods of territorial expansion known in history. During the eighteenth century Russia either toppled 
its seventeenth-century adversaries from Great Power status (Sweden, Turkey), or 
outright conquered them (Crimean Khanate, Poland). The status of a Great Power 
was followed by a brief period of European or perhaps even Eurasian hegemony 
during 1815-1850. Of course, this hegemony was not due only to the internal 
strength of the Russian Empire (forged on the anvil of the steppe frontier with 
CASE STUDIES 195 
a hammer of Baltic crusades, if I may be forgiven a poetic metaphor). Much of 
the explanation is also due to Russia getting out of phase with the secular cycles 
of other Eurasian empires, as a result of the anomalously long period of expansion. Note that the "crisis of the seventeenth century" was Eurasia-wide, affecting 
western Europe, Russia, the Ottoman Empire, and China (although not Persia or 
India). During the first half of the nineteenth century, both China and Turkey were 
well into their respective decentralization phases (which turned out to be the last 
one for the Ottoman Empire). More importantly, western Europe was experiencing its Age of Revolutions (1789-1848), which allowed Russia to play the role 
of the "gendarme of Europe" (e.g., the suppressing of the Hungarian revolution 
of 1849). Even England, while avoiding a full-blown state collapse, experienced 
significant sociopolitical instability during the 1830s (Goldstone 1991b). Thus, 
it was the relative strength of the Russian empire that explains its geopolitical 
preponderance during the first half of the nineteenth century.

The explanations underlying the Russian expansion of 1650-1850, I suggest, 
are twofold. First, Russia originated from a maximally intense metaethnic frontier, 
which, according to the theory, should produce a very high level of asabiya.

Second, at the beginning of the expansionary period Russia acquired huge areas 
of "black-earth lands" that were lightly populated but quite suitable to agriculture.

Colonization of these lands allowed peasant numbers to grow from around 10 
million in 1600 to more than 100 million in 1900. This enormous expansion of 
the productive stratum allowed the Russian society to find employment for all 
the elites. Because Russia was a strictly monogamous society, the elites grew no 
faster than commoners. Nobility constituted only 1-2% of the population in the 
Russian Empire (Mironov 2000), significantly reducing the potential for intraelite 
competition.

However, no growth can go on forever. During the nineteenth century the population of European Russia tripled from 36 to 100 million (McEvedy and Jones 
1978). Peasant/land ratios declined, food prices increased, and food shortages 
became common. Although the numbers of nobility stayed at around 2% of the 
population, new kinds of aspiring elites (raznochintsy, intelligentsia) were on the 
rise. Thus, by the second half of the nineteenth century the demographic-structural 
machinery has caught up with the previously "runaway" growth of the Russian 
empire.

The inversion of the secular trend, combined with logistical strains, started to 
exert a negative influence on the geopolitical prospects of the Russian empire 
around the middle of the nineteenth century. The defeat in the Crimean war was 
a temporary setback, but the abandonment of the Treaty of San Stefano (1878) 
under the pressure of the other Great Powers was a significant check on the expansion at the expense of the Ottoman Empire. The dynamic underlying this shift 
in relative geopolitical power was, first, the onset of the decentralization phase 
in Russia. Second, the other powers had just concluded their own decentralization phases and had entered on the expansionary imperialistic ones. Thus, Russia 
could continue to expand only in regions that were out of reach of European 
powers, such as central Asia. The clearest illustration of the effect of weakening internal structure on geopolitical expansion is the Russo-Japanese war. Even 
though Russia had a very disadvantageous logistics situation, and lost its expeditionary naval force in the battle of Tsushima, it managed to mass enough troops 
for a decisive push into Manchuria. However, the revolution of 1905-1907 caused 
the government to abandon the plan of land-based attack against the Japanese, 
because it needed the troops to quell the uprising.

The dynamics of political instability in Romanov Russia followed the by now 
familiar two-generation pattern, or, in the Russian case, the "fathers-and-sons" 
pattern (with apologies to Thrgenev). The first period of unrest occurred during 
the reign of Alexander ll. The 1860s and 1870s saw peasant riots and a terror 
campaign by revolutionaries, ending with the assassination of the tsar in 1881.

The following reign of Alexander m was, by contrast, a time of stability. The next 
instability period culminated in the revolutions of 1905-1907 and 1917, although 
there was a large contributing effect of geopolitical stress brought about by war, 
