
In retrospect, the finding of chaotic dynamics in the spatial version of the 
metaethnic frontier model is not surprising. Complex dynamics are promoted by 
nonlinearities and high dimensionality in dynamical systems. Several features of 
the frontier model introduce severe nonlinearities. One is the size-threshold effect 
(see Section 4.2.1): small polities are highly liable to extinction, but as soon as 
they grow over a certain size they become much more resistant to external pressure. The second threshold is Scrit• the critical value of average asabiya, below 
which an empire cannot sustain its cohesion. Yet another important factor is the 
logistic growth assumption underlying the asabiya equation. Logistic growth at 
low values of the state variable is essentially exponential, and thus is characterized by sensitive dependence. This means that two cells within a frontier zone 
that differ slightly in their initial asabiya (due to historical effects) will actually 
diverge in their asabiya values, even though they are subjected to exactly the 
same dynamic rule.

The high dimensionality of dynamics is imposed by space. Each cell is characterized by two state variables: its imperial index and its asabiya. Thus, the 
dimensionality of the dynamic process is twice the number of cells within the 
arena (for example, it is 800 for a 20 x 20 arena). This means that there are 
typically several empires contending for territory at any given time, and that each 
empire's internal composition is highly context and history specific. This situation 
dependence was already remarked on above.

To sum up, nonlinear functional forms and high dimensionality due to the 
spatial nature of the simulation conspire to make its dynamics highly chaotic. If 
the frontier model actually captures some important aspect of reality, then the 
prospects for long-term prediction of the trajectories of agrarian polities are not 
good. It is true that the spatial frontier model is extremely simple, even simplistic, 
but more complex models typically tend to have even more chaotic dynamics.

The Effect of the Logistic Load Parameter on Stability 
The analysis of the nonspatial frontier model suggested that the key factor determining stability in that model was the ratio hfb (increasing the spatial scale 
of power projection, quantified by h, in relation to the frontier width, b, resulted 
in a destabilization of the equilibrium polity size). In the spatial simulation, the 
width of the frontier is fixed at 1, but we can vary h and observe the effect 
on predicted dynamics. The nonspatial model suggests that decreasing h should 
eventually stabilize the dynamics, while increasing it should further destabilize 
the dynamics. Numerical exploration of the spatial simulation showed that this 
is indeed the case. When h is reduced to, for example, 1 (compared to the reference value of 2), the simulation output ceases to generate oscillations. Instead, 
after some transient dynamics, a number of medium-sized polities arises, each 
occupying between 7 and 16% of the total area (30-70 cells).

Increasing h serves to destabilize the dynamics, in accordance with predictions 
of the nonspatial model. For example, if we set h = 3, then, after some initial oscillations, one polity will eventually take over the whole simulation arena.

THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 73 
Lacking any frontiers, all cells will eventually decline in asabiya to 0. When the 
average empire asabiya declines below the threshold Scrit• the empire collapses, 
but since it collapses everywhere uniformly, no new boundaries arise, and the 
system persists in its stateless condition for ever.

The Reflux and Breakthrough Effects 
One further pattern predicted by the spatial simulation is worth discussing at this 
time. In examining the spatial dynamics of the simulation output, I noticed that 
challenger empires arising in the frontier zone initially tend to expand away from 
the older empire, into the hinterland, or even at the expense of other, smaller 
challengers near them (Figure 4.5).

In retrospect, it is very clear what is going on here. A challenger polity typically cannot successfully attack the old empire, because the empire is still very 
strong due to its large size and perhaps still not insubstantial average asabiya.

Meanwhile, the asabiya in the nonfrontier hinterland is low and expansion there 
is easy. Furthermore, as the challenger empire expands into the hinterland, its 
center of gravity moves away from the old empire, and thus the pressure it can 
exert on the old empire decreases with time. Further expansion within the hinterland is stopped only by logistic constraints (or by reaching the edge of the 
simulation arena). I term this expansion pattern away from the frontier zone the 
reflux effect.

Under certain conditions, the reflux does not occur. Specifically, this happens 
if a challenger arises late in the game, when the average asabiya of the old 
empire is so low that it cannot resist pressure from the challenger. In this case, 
we often observe a "breakthrough" effect: a long period of quasistasis, during 
which the asabiya of the old empire is slowly declining, while the asabiya of the 
challenger polity grows. Then suddenly the difference between the powers of the 
antagonists goes over the threshold lip, and the challenger takes over the border 
cells of the empire. This takeover catastrophically lowers the average asabiya of 
the old empire (since the only cells where asabiya is high are on the frontier), 
and leads to rapid expansion of the challenger into the interior regions of the old 
empire (and, frequently, to the collapse of the old empire, if its average asabiya, 
when deprived of border regions, goes below the threshold Scri1).

The reflux effect is a very typical feature of the dynamics predicted by the 
spatial simulation. It is also an emergent feature, because it was not built in at 
the micro level. This striking prediction of the model provides us with a way to 
test it, by looking through the historical record and determining whether reflux 
events are present in it.

Caveats 
Finally, I need to discuss the limitations of the frontier model, as well as how we 
could modify the model to address them. First, the simulation models distance 
effects using the simplest possible approach, by assuming that the power that an 
empire can bring to bear on a particular cell at its boundary declines exponentially 
Time = 26 Time = 29 
•• .. 0 0 0 0 
• • 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
