so the state attempts to increase its revenues through heavy taxation, or outright 
seizure of its subjects' property. Such fiscal policy inevitably leads to the ruin of 
the economy, and then to famines, pestilence, political unrest, and rebellion.

Such is the argument of Ibn Khaldun in a nutshell. Ibn Khaldun discusses 
many specific sociological and ecological mechanisms underlying each of the 
postulated links in his argument (for example, he explicitly connects the spread 
of epidemics to population density, although the microbial origin of diseases was 
not known in his days). I refer the reader to Ibn Khaldun's book for further 
details (as well as innumerable historical accounts of various specific instances 
of civilization collapse that invoke some variant of this argument).

The hypothesis that excessive population growth has negative effects on social 
dynamics has been vigorously debated for the last two centuries, ever since the 
work of Malthus (1798). I cannot review this enormous literature here, but note 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 119 
that theories postulating population growth as a direct cause of societal collapse 
do not appear to be empirically supported. Of much more current interest is the 
idea that population growth causes social crisis indirectly, by affecting social 
institutions, which in turn affect social stability (Goldstone 199lb). Goldstone 
refers to his theory of state breakdown as demographic-structural: demographic 
because the underlying driving force is population growth; structural because it 
is not the demographic trend itself that directly causes the state crisis, but its 
impact on economic, political, and social institutions (Goldstone 199lb:xxvi). I 
briefly summarize Goldstone's theory below (Goldstone 1991b:24-25).

Population growth in excess of the productivity gains of the land has multifarious effects on social institutions 
• First, it leads to persistent price inflation which outstrips the ability of agrarian states to increase tax revenues. Furthermore, increased population leads 
to expansion of armies and rising real costs. Thus, states have no choice but 
to seek to expand taxation, despite resistance from the elites and the general populace. Yet attempts to increase revenues cannot offset the spiraling 
state expenses. Thus, even though the state is rapidly raising taxes, it is still 
headed for fiscal crisis.

• Second, rapid expansion of population results in an increased number of 
aspirants for elite positions, which put further fiscal strains on the state.

Moreover, increased intraelite competition leads to the formation of rival 
patronage networks vying for state rewards. As a result, elites become riven 
by increasing rivalry and factionalism.

• Third, population growth leads to rural misery, urban migration, falling real 
wages, and increased frequency of food riots and wage protests.

• Another consequence of rapid population growth is the expansion of youth 
cohorts. This segment of the population is particularly impacted by lack of 
employment opportunities. Additionally, the youthfulness of the population 
contributes to its mobilization potential.

• Finally, elite competition and popular discontent fuel ideological conflicts.

For example, in early modem Europe, dissident elites and dissatisfied artisans 
were widely recruited into heterodox religious movements.

As all these trends intensify, the end result is state bankruptcy and consequent 
loss of military control; elite movements of regional and national rebellion; and a 
combination of elite-mobilized and popular uprisings that manifest the breakdown 
of central authority (Goldstone 1991b:25) 
One of the strengths of Goldstone's (1991b) analysis is his employment of 
quantitative data and models in tracing out the mechanistic connections between 
various economic, social, and political institutions (this is discussed further in 
Section 7.3.1). However, Goldstone does not develop his theory to the point of an 
explicit dynamic model. In particular, he treats the underlying engine of change, 
population growth, as an exogenous variable. He suggests that a combination 
of favorable climate and receding disease may explain the observed doubling of 
population in most world regions between 1500 and the early 1600s (Goldstone 
1991b:25). This choice was, clearly, not made lightly. Goldstone's (1986, l99la) 
analysis of population dynamics, prices, and real wages in early modem England led him to conclude that existing endogenous theories are not supported by 
the data. For example, the Malthusian-Ricardian model assumes that population 
movements respond to changing prices. However, as Goldstone shows with data, 
long-term mortality patterns were seemingly independent of real wages.

Perhaps this is the correct approach, and we need to look for specific exogenous factors that explain population dynamics in different periods and regions.

However, I do not think that the complete spectrum of endogenous models has 
been contrasted yet with data. In particular, I would like to explore the possibility 
that there is a feedback effect of political instability on population dynamics.

How can political stability or instability affect population dynamics? Let us 
start by assuming a Malthusian-Ricardian model of the interaction between population dynamics and food production. I have in mind something like the logistic 
model, which has two parameters. The intrinsic rate of population growth is a 
balance of birth and death rates in the absence of density feedback (that is, for 
low population densities). The carrying capacity is set by the climate and soil 
conditions, as well as the current level of agricultural technology (this is made 
more specific in the next section). Political instability can affect both parameters.

Most obviously, when the state is weak or absent, the populace will suffer from 
elevated mortality due to increased crime, banditry, and internal and external warfare. Furthermore, the times of troubles cause increased migration rate: refugees 
from war-affected areas, or areas whose productive potential has been destroyed 
(see below on this). Migration has several effects. First, it can lead to emigration 
(and we can simply add that to mortality). Second, people on the move cannot 
afford to have children. Thus, birth rates decline. Third, increased migration leads 
to epidemics. Increased vagrancy spreads disease by connecting areas that would 
stay isolated during better times. Additionally, vagabonds and beggars aggregate 
in towns and cities, increasing their population size. This may tip the density 
over the epidemiological threshold (the critical density above which a disease 
spreads). Finally, political instability causes lower reproduction rates, because 
during uncertain times people choose to marry later and to have fewer children.

Incidentally, people's choices about their family sizes may be reflected not only 
in birth rates, but also in rates of infanticide. Thus, family limitation practices 
