to the landward empire-nation belts. By contrast, I interpret the political evolution 
of Europe as centrifugal from the Carolingian-Ottonian core, in all directions 
but the southern one (where another old imperial core was located). Finally, the 
explanation advanced above has the virtue of generality. In his account Rokkan 
(1975:596) emphasizes the uniqueness of the European configurations. I suggest 
that what was unique about Europe was the particular combination of initial and 
boundary conditions (using the mathematical language), rather than the general 
mechanism. In other words, the specific course of events in Europe was contingent 
on the Roman Empire starting where it did, on the timing and locations of extraEuropean invasions, and on physical features such as the rivers and mountains, 
which affected where frontiers formed. But the general explanation, based on the 
link between frontiers and collective solidarity, should work outside of Europe.

At least, it seems to be a plausible working hypothesis (Tilly 1975), worthy of 
investigation in other world regions.

5.5 SUMMARY 
• The metaethnic frontier model predicts that large territorial polities originate 
in areas subjected to a prolonged influence by intense metaethnic frontiers.

In this chapter I empirically tested this prediction for Europe (plus Asia 
Minor) during the first two millennia c.E.

• I divided the total testing area into fifty "cultural regions" of between 0.1 
and 0.2 Mm2 in area. In each region and for each century from 0 to 1900 
c.E., I calculated a "frontier index," consisting of four components, based on 
differences in religion, language, and economic way of life across the ethnic 
divide, and on the intensity of warfare. An index of 0 is assigned to regions 
through which no frontier passes during the given century, while a score of 9 
is assigned to very intense, major metaethnic fault lines. I classified regions 
as "frontier" ones if they had a relatively intense (intensity score 5 or more) 
1Thanks to Jack Goldstone for suggesting this formulation.

AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 93 
and stationary (three or more centuries) frontier. The rest of the regions were 
classified as "no frontier" ones.

• I first examined the relationship between frontiers and large polities in the 
period ending 1000 c. E. There was a strong correlation between an intense 
and prolonged frontier in a region during the period of 0-500 c.E. and the 
maximum territory the polity originating from the region achieved during 
500-1000 c.E. A statistical test rejected the null hypothesis of no association 
with P « 0.001.

• A similar result was obtained for a comparison of frontiers during 500-
1500 c.E. and maximum polity sizes achieved during 1000-1900 c.E. Again, 
the null hypothesis was rejected at the P « 0.001 level. In particular, I 
found that all the European Great Powers (England, Castile-Spain, France, 
Brandenburg-Prussia-Germany, Austria, Lithuania-Poland, Byzantium, Ottoman Empire, and Muscovy-Russia) originated from areas subjected to 
intense and prolonged frontier influence. The only exception was SavoySardinia-Italy.

• I also examined an alternative hypothesis, based on the geopolitical notion 
of "marchland" positional advantage. I constructed an index of vulnerability 
for each region, based on the proportion of its boundary in coastline versus 
land. I found no association between the vulnerability index of a region and 
the size of polity that originated from it.

• These results provide a great degree of empirical support to the metaethnic 
frontier model, which outperformed both the null hypothesis of complete randomness, and an explicit rival hypothesis connecting positional advantage to 
geopolitical success. However, the test also revealed several anomalous cases, 
of which the most significant is the Italian one. In other words, although the 
frontier model predicted correctly the majority of large territorial polities (at 
least for Europe 500-1900 c.E.), it did not predict a few others. This observation suggests that there may be other mechanisms, in addition to the 
frontier one, that explain the genesis of large territorial polities.

Chapter Six 
Ethnokinetics 
6.1 ALLEGIANCE DYNAMICS OF INCORPORATED POPULATIONS 
The previous two chapters analyzed the initial stage of a polity's expansion, during which newly incorporated groups are rapidly integrated into the core ethnie.

One assumption of that theory was that the population inhabiting newly added 
areas immediately transfers its loyalty to the conquering empire. This is not necessarily an unrealistic assumption. Under certain circumstances, notably when 
newly incorporated elites are ethnically similar to the polity core, lack of strong 
ethnic differences may allow them to merge with the core elites without any 
substantial time lag.

Such a state of affairs, however, cannot last long. Sooner or later, a successfully 
expansionist empire will annex a territory inhabited by ethnically very different 
people (alloethnics). In fact, one definition of an empire is a polity encompassing 
more than one ethnie. Once a polity becomes multiethnic, its ability to function 
and expand will be strongly affected by the loyalties of incorporated ethnies.

The asabiya profiles of annexed ethnies will probably show a substantial decline 
between the regional level (inhabited by each ethnie) and that of the empire.

This has two consequences. First, because members of annexed ethnies feel little 
loyalty to the empire, they will be reluctant to contribute resources to it. Thus, 
annexation of an alien ethnie will increase the geopolitical power of the empire 
much less than adding an equivalent number of ethnically similar people. (If the 
state coerces alloethnics to contribute the same amount as members of the core 
ethnie, the overall contribution to the state power is still going to be diminished, 
since coercion is expensive.) It is especially difficult to obtain willing and loyal 
recruits for the army from alloethnies, so many empires choose to recruit only 
from the core ethnie (examples, the Roman Republic, but not Empire; the Russian 
Empire).

Second, ethnically different people are much more likely to rebel against the 
empire. If their ethnie-level asabiya is high, it will be relatively easy for their 
elites to overcome the collective-action problems associated with starting a successful uprising (for a general review of this issue, see Goldstone 1994). Thus, the 
empire will have to devote a considerable amount of resources to either buying 
the alloethnic elites off, or suppressing their rebellions.
