the best-known theory of social cohesion has been developed by Durkheim (1915, 
1933). Gellner (1981:86-98) provides a highly useful comparison of Ibn Khatdun's and Durkheim's theories, which I briefly summarize here. As is well known, 
Durkheim contrasted two kinds of solidarities: mechanical which was based on 
similarity between individuals and organic which was based on complementarity 
or mutual interdependence. Simple segmentary societies, such as the Bedouins of 
Ibn Khaldun, can possess only mechanical solidarity, while more complex urban 
societies characterized by greater division of labor have the potential to exhibit 
organic solidarity. In Durkheim's view, mechanical solidarity was an inferior form 
of social cohesion, compared to organic solidarity.

In Ibn Khaldun's theory the only kind of social cohesion is the one arising 
from what Durkheim would call mechanical solidarity. "Organic solidarity" for 
Ibn Khaldun was not solidarity at all, but a form of social dissolution. Civilized 
life with its complex division of labor was inherently inimical to social cohesion 
and given time would degrade the initially high asabiya of tribesmen moving to 
town (Gellner 1981:87).

In general, it is not clear whether such economic variables as the degree of division of labor have any relevance to the waxing or waning of asabiya. By contrast, 
cultural uniformity appears to be an important precondition of social cohesion.

Ruling elites of such successful nation-states as France certainly thought so, and 
COLLECfiVE SOLIDARITY 43 
as a result employed rather draconian methods for imposing linguistic uniformity 
on their citizens (Weber 1976). In any case, the Durkheimian concept of organic 
solidarity appears to be primarily applicable to industrial societies. If so, then the 
distinction between organic and mechanical solidarity is largely irrelevant in our 
analysis of preindustrial agrarian polities. On the other hand, Durkheim's insight 
that religion is one of the most powerful forces that keep groups together appears 
to be highly relevant to the issues under investigation (see also Collins 1992).

Individualism and Collectivism 
At first glance, it would appear that the direction within social psychology most 
relevant to social cohesion would be research on the individualism/collectivism dichotomy (Triandis 1995). A closer look, however, reveals that the two approaches 
apparently address different social scales. Actually, social psychologists studying 
individualism and collectivism do not explicitly discuss the scale of the group at 
which collectivistic behaviors are aimed. From the context of their studies, however, it becomes apparent that they typically focus on small-scale groups: families 
and local communities. However, although there is no explicit consideration of 
scale in the analysis, results obtained for small-scale groups are sometimes generalized to larger-scale societies. Furthermore, the primary variable of interest to 
psychologists is not the properties of groups made up from individualistic versus collectivistic individuals, but the inverse relation: the effect of the group on 
individuals. This is, of course, understandable since psychologists are primarily 
interested in individual behaviors, rather than the capacity of groups for collective action. Nevertheless, it decreases the relevance of their findings for issues of 
interest to us. Still, there is much of value in this area of psychology, not least 
of which is the empirical research on variation in individualism/collectivism in 
different cultures.

Social Capital 
Of much greater relevance is the theory of social capital, which recently has garnered a lot of attention, thanks in part to several books and articles by Robert 
Putnam and associates (see, for example, Putnam 2000; for a closely related concept of social trust see Fukuyama 1995) Such aspects of social capital as mutual 
support, cooperation, social trust, institutional effectiveness, and, particularly, the 
implications of social capital for collective action suggest to me that social capital 
and collective solidarity are closely related concepts. "Social capital here refers 
to features of social organization, such as trust, norms, and networks, that can 
improve the efficiency of society by facilitating coordinated action" (Putnam et 
al. 1993:167). This is very close to my definition of asabiya as the capacity of a 
group for collective action. Thus, asabiya appears to be essentially the agrarian 
societies' equivalent of social capital (at least as the latter is defined by Putnam 
and eo-workers). Several other features of social capital deserve a comment.

• There are two forms of social capital: bridging (or inclusive) and bonding 
(or exclusive) (Putnam 2000:22). Examples of bonding social capital include 
ethnic fraternal organizations and exclusive country clubs, while the civil 
rights movement and ecumenical religious organizations are examples of 
bridging social capital. This distinction appears to address the issue of social 
scale: bonding social capital characterizes smaller-scale groups, while the 
bridging kind characterizes larger-scale societies.

• Putnam cautions that social capital may have its "dark side." While it is 
generally good for those inside the network, the external effects of social 
capital are by no means always pOSitive (Putnam 2000:21). One example is 
power elites exploiting social capital to achieve ends that are antisocial from 
a wider perspective. This is very similar to the already discussed idea of 
internally solidaristic groups coercing other, less cohesive groups.

• Societies belonging to different countries, and even regions within countries, 
vary in the amount of social capital. For example, Putnam et al. (1993) show 
that both the density of interpersonal ties and institutional effectiveness vary 
greatly between north and south Italy. Similarly, Fukuyama (1995) advances 
the argument that different industrial countries vary in the degree of social 
trust, and that this variation explains much about the economic effectiveness 
of their corporations.

Contrasting Social Capital and Collectivism 
To illustrate why I think of social capital as a much more useful concept for 
our purpose than collectivism, it is instructive to contrast how the two concepts 
are applied when comparing two specific countries, the United States and Italy 
(with an emphasis on the Italian south-the Mezzogiorno). Triandis (1995:92-93, 
97-98) classifies the Mezzogiorno society as collectivist and American as individualist. From the point of view of social capital, however, the picture is completely 
reversed: southern Italians have very little of it, while Americans have lots (Putnam et al. 1993; Putnam 2000). The sociological study of the Mezzogiorno goes 
back at least to Banfield (1967). Banfield described the extreme atomization of 
the southern Italian society, in which all cooperative efforts are limited to the 
smallest possible societal unit, the family. Relations to such kin as cousins, and 
sometimes even grown-up siblings, are rife with distrust and lack of cooperation.

Community-level cooperative efforts are virtually impossible. Banfield called this 
type of society "amoral familism," and drew an explicit contrast with the vibrant 
civic culture of a small Midwestern American town.

In a later study that contrasted the Italian north and south, Putnam and eoworkers (1993) described how lack of interpersonal association, trust, and cooperation in the Mezzogiorno leads to ineffective and corrupt local government.

In contrast, the north has a much greater level of civic engagement, and correspondingly more effective government on the local level. A recent study (A'Heam 
