particularly important if the discipline deals with dynamic quantities (see the next 
section). Everybody is familiar with the paradigmatic example of classical mechanics. But two more recent examples from biology are the synthetic theory of 
evolution that emerged during the second quarter of the twentieth century (Ruse 
1999), and the ongoing synthesis in population ecology (for example, Thrchin 
2003). In all these cases, the impetus for synthesis was provided by the development of mathematical theory.

Can something similar be done in historical sociology? Several attempts have 
been made in the past (e.g., Bagehot 1895; Rashevsky 1968), but they clearly 
failed to make an impact on how history is studied today. I think there are two 
major reasons explaining this failure. First, these attempts were inspired directly 
by successes in physical sciences. Yet physicists traditionally choose to deal with 
systems and phenomena that are very different from those in history. Physicists 
tend to choose very simple systems with few interacting components (such as 
the solar system, the hydrogen atom, etc.) or systems consisting of a huge number of identical components (as in thermodynamics). As a result, very precise 
quantitative predictions can be made and empirically tested. But even in physical 
applications such systems are rare, and in social sciences only very trivial questions can be reduced to such simplicity. Real societies always consist of many 
qualitatively and quantitatively different agents interacting in very complex ways.

Furthermore, societies are not closed systems: they are strongly affected by exogenous forces, such as other human societies, and by the physical world. Thus, 
it is not surprising that traditional physical approaches honed on simple systems 
should fail in historical applications.

The second reason is that the quantitative approaches typically employed by 
physicists require huge amounts of precisely measured data. For example, a physicist studying nonlinear laser dynamics would without further ado construct a 
highly controlled lab apparatus and proceed to collect hundreds of thousands of 
extremely accurate measurements. These data would then be analyzed using sophisticated methods on a high-powered computer. Nothing could be further from 
the reality encountered by a historical sociologist, who typically lacks data about 
many aspects of the historical system under study, while possessing fragmentary 
and approximate information about others. For example, one of the most important aspects of any society is just how many members it has. But even this kind 
of information usually must be reconstructed by historians on the basis of much 
guesswork.

If these two problems are the real reason why previous attempts failed, then 
some recent developments in natural sciences provide a basis for hope. First, 
during the last 20-30 years, physicists and biologists have mounted a concerted 
attack on complex systems. A number of approaches can be cited here: nonlinear dynamics, synergetics, complexity, and so on. The use of powerful computers has been a key element in making these approaches work. Second, biologists, and ecologists in particular, have learned how to deal with short and 
noisy data sets. Again, plentiful computing power was a key enabler, allowing 
such computer-intensive approaches as nonlinear model fitting, bootstrapping, and 
cross-validation.

There is another hopeful development, this time in social sciences. I am referring to the rise of quantitative approaches in history, or cliometrics {Williamson 
1991 ). Currently, there are many investigators who collect quantitative data on 
various aspects of historical processes, and large amounts of data are already 
available in electronic form.

These observations suggest that another attempt at building and testing quantitative theories in historical sociology may be timely. If we achieve even partial 
success, the potential payoff is so high that it warrants making the attempt. And 
there are several recent developments in which application of modeling and quantitative approaches to history have already yielded interesting insights.

STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 3 
1.2 HISTORICAL DYNAMICS AS A RESEARCH PROGRAM 
Many historical processes are dynamic. Generally speaking, dynamics is the scientific study of any entities that change with time. One aspect of dynamics deals 
with a phenomenological description of temporal behaviors-trajectories (this is 
sometimes known as kinematics). But the heart of dynamics is the study of mechanisms that bring about temporal change and explain the observed trajectories.

A very common approach, which has proved its worth in innumerable applications, consists of taking a holistic phenomenon and mentally splitting it up into 
separate parts that are assumed to interact with each other. This is the dynamical systems approach, because the whole phenomenon is represented as a system 
consisting of several interacting elements (or subsystems, since each element can 
also be represented as a lower-level system).

As an example, consider the issue raised at the very beginning of the book.

An empire is a dynamic entity because various aspects of it (the most obvious 
ones being the extent of the controlled territory and the number of subjects) 
change with time: empires grow and decline. Various explanations for imperial 
dynamics address different aspects of empires. For example, we may be concerned 
with the interacting processes of surplus product extraction and warfare (e.g., 
Tilly 1990). Then we might represent an empire as a system consisting of such 
subsystems as the peasants, the ruling elite, the army, and perhaps the merchants.

Additionally, the empire controls a certain territory and has certain neighboring 
polities (that is, there is a higher-level system-or metasystem-that includes 
the empire we study as a subsystem). In the dynamical system's approach, we 
must describe mathematically how different subsystems interact with each other 
(and, perhaps, how other systems in the metasystem affect our system). This 
mathematical description is the model of the system, and we can use a variety of 
methods to study the dynamics predicted by the model, as well as attempt to test 
the model by comparing its predictions with the observed dynamics.

The conceptual representation of any holistic phenomenon as interacting subsystems is always to some degree artifical. This artificiality, by itself, cannot be 
an argument against any particular model of the system. All models simplify the 
reality. The value of any model should be judged only against alternatives, taking 
into account how well each model predicts data, how parsimonious the model is, 
and how much violence its assumptions do to reality. It is important to remember 
that there are many examples of very useful models in natural sciences whose 
assumptions are known to be wrong. In fact, all models are by definition wrong, 
and this should not be held against them.

Mathematical models are particularly important in the study of dynamics, because dynamic phenomena are typically characterized by nonlinear feedbacks, 
often acting with various time lags. Informal verbal models are adequate for 
generating predictions in cases where assumed mechanisms act in a linear and 
additive fashion (as in trend extrapolation), but they can be very misleading when 
we deal with a system characterized by nonlinearities and lags. In general, nonlinear dynamical systems have a much wider spectrum of behaviors than could be 
imagined by informal reasoning (for example, see Hanneman et al. 1995). Thus, 
a formal mathematical apparatus is indispensable when we wish to rigorously 
connect the set of assumptions about the system to predictions about its dynamic 
behavior.

1.2.1 Delimiting the Set of Questions 
History offers many puzzles and somehow we must select which of the questions 
