were distinct both linguistically and religiously from the Romans of the classical 
age, but the cultural changes went ever deeper, including a striking transformation 
from the naturalism and rationalism of Hellenism to the transcendentalism and 
mysticism of the fifth and sixth centuries (McNeill 1963:451). Of course, the 
Byzantines continued to call themselves "the Romans," but so did many other 
people-from "the Holy Roman Empire of the German nation" to the modem 
Romanians and the (gypsy)Roma and even the Rum Seljuks. Note that I am 
not suggesting that this ethnic transformation occurred overnight, or even within 
the course of a single century. The eastern Roman Empire was subjected to an 
extreme pressure from barbarians in the north and the Muslims in the east for at 
least half a millennium. But the Byzantines survived and when the pressure abated 
in the middle of the ninth century embarked on sustained territorial expansion of 
their own (Whittow 1996, Treadgold 1997).

So far I discussed polities that formed in situ on the former Roman frontier.

One feature fairly unique to the particular period, however, is the number of 
polities for whom the location of ethnogenesis was quite distant from the location of the polity that was eventually established. Thus, Visigoths and Ostrogoths 
originated north of the Black Sea, yet established states in the Iberian and Appenine peninsulas, respectively. Langobards initially coalesced in Pannonia (HUN), 
but eventually established a state in northern Italy. The Hungarian plain, in fact, 
saw a truly bewildering succession of state-building ethnies: the Dacians before 
the Roman conquest, then the Huns, Gepids and Langobards, Avars, and finally 
Magyars. The reason for such a rapid ethnic turnover, most likely, is the location 
at the western end of Eurasian steppe, making this plain the last stop of invading 
nomadic hordes.

Cases Not Fitting the Predictions of the Metaethnic Theory 
Four regions fell into the category of "frontier, but no empire." In each case, 
the reason is incorporation into an empire based in a neighboring region. NFR 
and AUS were incorporated into the Frankish Empire, TRA was part of the 
Avar Khanate, and BUL was an integral part of the Bulgarian Khanate (whose 
center was initially in VLH and later shifted south ~o BUL). In addition, AUS is 
disadvantaged with respect to its neighbors, since it sits on the rugged segment 
of the Roman frontier (it has a mountain chain, the Alps, running right through 
its middle).

The single case in the "no frontier, but empire" category is the Duchy of 
Aquitaine. As discussed in the previous section, any instances falling into this 
category are considered as anomalies from the point of view of the frontier 
model. However, Aquitaine does not present a strong challenge to the theory.

This polity was formed after the collapse of Merovingian Frankish Empire, and 
can be considered as a relict (along with Neustria and Austrasia). It was reincorporated into the Carolingian Empire during the eighth century. Thus, this polity 
may not even merit inclusion into the analysis, but I decided on the conservative 
course of action.

In summary, the results of the analysis of Europe during the first millennium 
c. E. provide strong support for the frontier model. The statistical test indicates that 
there is a high degree of correlation between the frontier and the genesis of large 
states (Table 5.1 ). Actually, the pattern is so clearcut that almost no statistical test 
is needed. Essentially all large polities that are found on the map of Europe during 
the 500-1000 c.E. were organized by peoples who went through ethnogenesis on 
the frontier of the Roman Empire. The only exceptions are two exogenous polities 
(the Avars and Omayyads) and a possible anomaly (Aquitaine). By contrast, the 
heartlands of the Empire (notably Italy and Spain), as well as tribal hinterlands far 
from the frontier (northern and eastern Europe) were conspicuous in the absence 
of in situ-originating polities. This general pattern is precisely what the frontier 
model predicts.

5.2.2 Europe: 1000-1900 c.E.

After the Roman Empire collapsed, the geography of frontiers in Europe became 
much more complex. First, there were more frontiers. During the period 500-1500 
c.E. slightly more than half (28 out of 50) of cultural regions were classified as 
frontier ones (a frontier of intensity five or higher located in the region for three 
or more centuries). Second, frontiers were much more dynamic than during the 
Roman era. We can distinguish three general classes of frontiers.

The first set of frontiers, which dominated western Europe throughout much of 
the period, are the Carolingian marches (Bartlett 1993). Into this class, I include 
frontiers of the predecessor polity (Merovingian Empire), as well as successor 
polities, collectively referred to as the Latin Christianity (Bartlett 1993 ). The 
frontier in northwestern France faced Bretons and later Norse; the Spanish march 
guarded against the Muslims of Cordoba Emirate, a later site of the Reconquista.

The Austrian march initially was the site of Carolingian operations against the 
Avar Khanate. Later, it faced the brunt of the Magyar incursions. After the Hungarians converted to Latin Christianity, this frontier lost its intensity (but was 
reactivated in the sixteenth century as a result of the Ottoman advance).

Finally, the Saxon march during the pre-Carolingian times was directed toward 
pagan Germans. After Charlemagne's conquest of Saxons, this frontier bifur-
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 87 
cated, with one prong moving east, and eventually transforming itself into German Drang nach Osten. The second prong moved north through Scandinavia, first 
affecting Denmark (whose very name reflects its position on the Danish march), 
and then Sweden and Norway. The northern prong fluctuated between "push" 
and "pull" influences. At the height of its power, the Carolingian empire exerted 
military (this mostly affected the Danish) and ideological pressure. Persistent 
proselytization attempts, however, triggered a backlash from native paganism, 
especially in Sweden, which was finally Christianized only during the twelfth 
century. After the Carolingian decline, the frontier recoiled, with Scandinavians 
even colonizing parts of northwestern France. However, in the end Christianity won, and the eastern expansion resumed. In the northern Baltic, the Danish 
and Swedish advance sometimes competed and sometimes cooperated with the 
German expansion along the southern shore.

The second set of frontiers can be collectively called "the Great Steppe frontier" (McNeilll964). One end of this frontier is located in present-day Hungary 
(Great Alfold plain), which is the westernmost extension of the Great Eurasian 
Steppe. From HUN it runs first east (TRA, VLH, MOL) and then northeast (ZAP, 
UKR, SRU, KAZ), following the transition between forests and grasslands. The 
steppe frontier had a greater degree of stationarity, compared to the Carolingian 
marches and their offshoots, because it was (and still is) anchored by the physical 
