One disadvantage of using Europe as a testbed of general theory is the argument 
that Europe may have a number of unique features distinguishing it from the rest 
of the world; special characteristics that explain its spectacular rise during the 
modem era (e.g., Jones 1981; Landes 1998). However, explanations of the rise of 
Europe based on such "European exceptionalism" have been severely criticized 
(Blaut 1993, 2000). Furthermore, current scholarship (summarized by Frank 1998; 
Pomeranz 2000) suggests that Europe began diverging from other world regions 
only after 1800. In any case, it is not necessary for me to choose a side in this 
debate. My working assumption at this time is that the metaethnic frontier theory 
is equally applicable to Europe and other world regions. Here I report on the 
results of testing the theory on European material, while future publications will 
report on tests of the theory in Central/East Asian, South Asian, and Southwest 
Asian regions (research in progress). In other words, I treat this as an empirical 
issue. In Charles Tilly's words, "the European historical experience, for all its 
special features, is long enough, well-enough documented, and a large influence 
on the rest of the world that any systematic conclusions which hold up well in the 
light of that experience would almost automatically become plausible hypotheses 
to be tried elsewhere" (Tilly 1975:13).

Geographically, Europe is a western peninsula of Eurasia, and thus the boundary separating it from the rest of the Old World is somewhat arbitrary. I use 
the standard geographic boundary between Europe and Asia (Urals Mountains, 
Ural River, Caspian Sea, the Great Caucasian mountain chain, Black Sea), but 
with two exceptions. I will omit the area of Northern Caucasus, because its history is poorly known for most of the period of interest. However, I include the 
Anatolian peninsula (Asia Minor), because excluding it would force me to treat 
several important European Great Powers (the Byzantine and Ottoman Empires) 
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 79 
as exogenous intrusions. Another area where drawing a sharp boundary is problematic is the Iberian-Moroccan junction. I chose to treat Moroccan polities (most 
notably, Almoravids and Almohads) as exogenous intrusions.

Because my focus is on agrarian polities, the temporal end point I use is 1900 
C.E. Although several states in northwest Europe had made the agrarian-industrial 
transition by this time, this development affects only a small part of the spatiotemporal domain. I chose 500 c.E., which roughly coincides with the fall of 
the western Roman Empire, as the starting point for the consideration of polity 
dynamics. Because frontiers affect ethnopolitical dynamics with a long time Jag, I 
started my frontier database at 0 c.E. I readily admit that the spatial and temporal 
bounds that I chose are somewhat arbitrary and other choices could be made.

However, I would argue that the important principle here is that all regions and 
all polities falling within the specific spatiotemporal bounds should be used in the 
empirical test. In this way, the outcome of the test cannot be criticized as resulting from conscious or unconscious selection bias. As to specific spatiotemporal 
bounds, they simply need to encompass sufficient number of regions and polities 
so that we can do statistics.

5.1.1 Quantifying Frontiers 
Frontiers are hard entities to pin down (Hall 2000), both in time and space. They 
move around and have fuzzy spatial extent. Yet, in order to devise a statistical 
test, we have to discretize them. The first step is to divide space into discrete geographical units. I divided the total area into some 50 "cultural regions," mostly 
characterized by areas of between 0.1 and 0.2 Mm2 (Figure 5.1 ). When drawing 
the borders between the geographical units I attempted to take into account major 
fixed terrain features (mountains, coastline) and ethnic divisions (language, religion). In addition to spatial divisions, I also need temporal ones. Because we are 
dealing with very slow processes, I divided time into intervals of one century.

Let me reiterate that any scheme that would translate temporally dynamic and 
spatially fuzzy things like frontiers into discrete spatiotemporal units must be 
procrustean, to a greater or lesser degree. I have no doubt that better schemes 
than the one proposed here can be devised. Yet one needs to start somewhere.

This is what I do here, while hoping that in the future the approach will be 
improved or a better alternative will be proposed.

With over 50 cultural regions and 19 centuries I have close to a thousand areacenturies, which are my main data units for analysis of shifting frontiers in Europe 
0--1900 c.E. The next step is to assign each unit a quantitative score reflecting the 
intensity of cross-ethnic interaction in it. I assume that the interaction intensity 
has four components, based on differences in religion, language, way of life, and 
the pressure of warfare. I give religious difference a score with four levels: 
• The highest score, 3, is given to areas where Islam and Christianity interact 
with each other, or with paganism.

• The next score, 2, is given to major religious divisions within Christianity or 
Islam (e.g., Catholics versus Orthodox after 1000 c.E.; Shiites versus Sunnis).

Figure 5.1 Cultural regions used as geographical units in the statistical analysis of the 
relationship between metaethnic frontiers and polity size.

• Sects within the same religion are scored as 1. Examples include Catholics 
versus Protestants, or Latin and Greek Christians prior to 1000 c.E. I also 
scored differences between various pagan religions at this level, because 
these religions, unlike Christianity and Islam, tend not to be exclusive and 
proselytizing.

• Finally, no religious difference is scored as 0.

Linguistic distinctions are scored 0 (none), 1 (different languages within the 
same linguistic group: Romance, Germanic, and Slavic), and 2 (different linguistic groups). I do not give an extra point for different linguistic families (IndoEuropean, Ugro-Finnic, etc.) because I assume that once languages diverged to 
the point of complete mutual incomprehensibility (which certainly happened by 
the time the two languages belong to different groups), the speakers will have 
no way of knowing that they belong to the same linguistic family. My reasons 
for giving an intermediate score of l to speakers of clearly related languages 
(such as Catalan and Castilian, or Occitan and French) are as follows. First, a 
speaker of the northern French (langue d 'oi1) will recognize Occitan as a related 
language, and may feel a greater degree of kinship to an Occitan speaker than 
to a German. Second, historically the gradations between languages belonging 
to the same group were typically not abrupt. Thus, it would be difficult to draw 
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 81 
clearcut boundaries during the Middle Ages separating Romance speakers from 
each other. The same was true with respect to the area inhabited by Germanic 
languages and dialects, or the area including speakers of east and west Slavic 
languages.

The greatest difference in the economic way of life (score 2) is between settled agriculturalists and nomadic pastoralists. This distinction codes for a whole 
