or"regnalism"; see Reynolds 1997).

Capacity for Solidaristic Behaviors 
A very powerful approach for inferring patterns of collective action from individual behaviors is the rational choice theory (Coleman 1990). The basic premise 
of this theory is that individuals are utility maximizers. The rational choice theory, however, has been unable to solve one very important problem in sociology: 
how societies can function without falling apart. An important theory (as formulated, for example, by Thomas Hobbes) maintains that society is based on the 
concept of social contract. However, it turns out that if people acted on a purely 
rational basis, they would never be able to get together to form society at all 
(Collins 1992:9). In fact, this "nonobvious sociological insight" {Collins 1992) 
approaches, in my view, the logical status of a theorem. For example, Kraus 
(1993) shows how the best developed theories of Hobbesian contractarianism all 
founder on the collective action problem, the free-rider predicament {Olson 1965; 
for a nontechnical review, see Collins 1992:13-19).

There appears to be only one solution to the puzzle of how societies can hold 
together (Collins 1992). Although people pursue their selfish interests most of the 
time, they also have feelings of solidarity with at least some other people. Such 
precontractual solidarity, in Durkheim's words, is the basis of societies (Collins 
1992). States and armies break apart when people stop thinking of themselves as 
members of the group and think only of their own individual self-interest (Collins 
1992:23).

Thus, the functioning of society can only be understood as a mixture of selfcentered (rational) and group-centered ("extrarational") behaviors. In Collins' 
(1992:8) view, "the overall structure of society is best understood as a result 
of conflicting groups, some of which dominate the others. But conflict and domination themselves are possible only because groups are integrated at the micro 
level." This statement captures very nicely the essence of the approach that I 
develop here.

COLLECIIVE SOLIDARITY 31 
3.1.2 Evolution of Solidaristic Behaviors 
The preceeding argument suggests that, in order to understand the functioning of 
societies and states, the rational choice theory must be supplemented by norms 
that promote group-maintenance behaviors. This observation, coupled with overwhelming empirical evidence for norms, leads to the question: where do norms 
come from? More precisely, we need a theory for how group-promoting norms 
could arise in the process of social evolution. Several mechanisms have been 
proposed, including reciprocity, punishment, kin selection, and group selection 
(Richerson and Boyd 1998).

Reciprocity as a mechanism for building trust and cooperation in longcontinued interactions was proposed by Trivers (1971). Subsequently, Axelrod 
and Hamilton ( 1981) showed that a simple strategy, "tit for tat" (cooperate on 
the first round and then do as your partner did last time), provides a cooperative 
solution in the repeated prisoner's dilemma game. Thus, cooperation is possible 
between two rational individuals, provided that they interact over a long term.

The problem is that the tit-for-tat strategy does not generalize to large groups, 
because it is very difficult to get reciprocity to increase when rare in a large 
group dominated by unconditional defection (Boyd and Richerson 1988).

Punishment has also been proposed as a mechanism to support norms. Axelrod (1997:44-71) used a series of computer simulations to investigate conditions 
under which norms can evolve and be stable. One possibility that he investigated 
is the employment of metanorms, or willingness to punish someone who did 
not enforce a norm. Axelrod found that a norm could become stabilized by a 
metanorm. However, this result was dependent on the population starting with a 
sufficiently high number of norm enforcers. If there were too few "avengers" to 
start with, then both the norm and the metanorm collapsed. A similar model was 
developed by Boyd and Richerson (1992), who showed that a division of labor 
can arise, with few, or even one, punisher preventing a large number of reluctant 
cooperators from defecting. However, there are some problems (Richerson and 
Boyd 1998). First, the number of group members that can be coerced by leaders 
is limited. Second, what is lacking in the punishment system is a mechanism 
to regulate individual behaviors in the group interest (if a leader is capable of 
coercing the whole group, then (s)he might be motivated to use the group in 
his/her interests). Finally, comparative evidence is not supportive of the idea that 
coercion can generate ultrasociality (Richerson and Boyd 1998:79).

Reciprocity and coercion are rational behaviors. But, as was noted above, 
norms promoting group-beneficial behaviors cannot arise as a result of a contract 
between self-interested individuals. Similarly, it is difficult to imagine how altruistic behaviors might arise if evolution acts only at the individual level (all formal 
models developed so far indicate that this is impossible). The only known theoretical mechanism for the evolution of altruism is multilevel selection (Sober and 
Wilson 1991 ), The noncontroversial example of multilevel evolutionary mechanism is kin selection, based on W. D. Hamilton's concept of inclusive fitness. A 
more controversial mechanism is group selection. Evolutionary biologists have 
gone through phases of first uncritically accepting group selection, and then repudiating the concept (Sober and Wilson 1991). Currently, there is a cautious but 
definite acceptance of group selection as a legitimate evolutionary mechanism, 
given certain conditions (which human groups satisfy; Sober and Wilson 1991).

Unfortunately, many sociologists still think of group selection as a thoroughly 
discredited concept (e.g., Sanders 1999).

There seems no doubt that altruism can evolve in small groups by the mechanism of kin or group selection (Richerson and Boyd 1998). Furthermore, kin and 
group selection are not logically distinct categories (Sober and Wilson 1991) and 
can work synergistically (Jones 2000). Additionally, although altruistic norms 
cannot evolve purely by the mechanisms of reciprocity and punishment, these 
mechanisms can substantially enhance the likelihood of norms evolving in a 
group selection context, by reducing (although not completely eliminating) the 
free-rider problem. Another potential feature that could enhance evolution of altruism is leveling institutions, such as monogamy and food sharing among nonkin 
(Boehm 1997). Bowles (1999) lists yet other altruism-promoting characteristics 
of groups: segmentation, conformism, and parochialism.

While evolution of altruism in small groups is widely accepted by social biologists, and accounts satisfactorily for the small-scale cooperation in nonhuman 
primates, certain aspects of human ultrasociality remain puzzling (Richerson and 
Boyd 1998). There is some controversy about whether kin and genetic group 
selection, even when buttressed by reciprocity, punishment, and leveling institutions, could account for altruistic behaviors in large groups, where the recipient of 
altruism is not a relative, nor personally known to the altruistic donor. Sober and 
Wilson ( 1991) contend that, given the characteristics of human collectives, group 
selection is an entirely plausible mechanism. Boyd and Richerson think it is not 
enough, and propose their own theory, which invokes cultural group selection 
(original theory in Boyd and Richerson 1985; recent assessments in Richerson 
and Boyd 1998, 2001).

An important preadaptation for cultural group selection is what Boyd and Richerson call the conformist transmission of cultural traits, for example, "when in 
