because the empire has progressively decreasing resources. At some point, S begins to increase again (when A falls below 2b), but by that point it is too late: 
the positive feedback dynamic (decreased A-decreased resources-even faster decrease in A) overwhelms any increase in S, and the empire collapses (A hits 0).

An example of these dynamics is shown in Figure 4.3.

This analysis illustrates the value of translating verbal theories into mathematical models. Even though we made a number of greatly simplified assumptions, so 
that our model is at best a caricature of reality, nevertheless, the model turned out 
to be capable of more complex behavior than we could have guessed beforehand.

Most importantly, although the model confirms that the postulated mechanism can 
lead to imperial boom/bust cycles, it also indicated that other kinds of dynamics are possible for different parameter values. Most importantly, if the empire's 
"reach" (as quantified by parameter h) is not much longer than the frontier width 
(b), then the expected boom/bust cycle will not materialize. Instead, the empire 
1.0 
Ci) 0.8 .... ' 0 ' $ 0.6 1/) 
Q) 
::c 
cu "I: 0.4 cu 
> 
~ - 0.2 Cl) 
0.0 
0 10 20 
' ' ' ' ' 
30 
Time 
~ 
~ 
.............

---
40 50 60 
Figure 4.3 Dynamics of Model (4.5) for the case of unstable equilibrium. Parameter 
values: r0 = 0.1, c0 = 1, h = 1, b = 0.2, and a= 0.1.

will reach a state of equilibrium Gust as in the original geopolitical model without asabiya dynamics). Furthermore, b must be substantially less than h. While 
the precise quantitative result, b < h/4, is likely to be affected by the structural 
assumptions of the model (for example, the linear relationships assumed for various functions), the qualitative insight is probably robust. Frontier areas must be 
small in relation to the empire size, determined by logistic constraints; if they are 
not, then no boom/bust dynamics ensue.

The other interesting insight is that the model does not appear to admit repeated boom/bust cycles or sustained oscillations. The key factor preventing a 
resurgence of a collapsing empire is that the outside pressure never relents (it 
is parameterized by a constant a). In reality, the pressure from outside is likely 
to come from other polities that will have their own logistic limitations. Thus, 
if we model the rival states explicitly, perhaps we will see another possible dynamic behavior that cannot be generated by the very simple model we developed 
here. This is a conjecture that I will pursue in the context of the spatially explicit 
simulation (next section).

Finally, yet another advantage of translating verbal theory into simple mathematical models is that we can quickly check the effects of various assumptions.

For example, in the derivation of the model I assumed that asabiya grows logistically. What is the effect of using another growth model, for example the 
asymptotic one? It turns out that this assumption does not substantially affect the 
qualitative results. Most importantly, the isocline structure is precisely the same 
as in the model with the logistic S.1 Similarly, making r(x) a nonlinear function of space in Figure 4.1 does not affect the isocline structure. Finally, Sergey 
Nefedov (personal communication) investigated the effect of not using the approximation exp[ x] = 1 + x in deriving the equation for A, and found that the 
qualitative result is unchanged, but the quantitative condition for the boom/bust 
cycle becomes 2b < h instead of 2b < h/2 in Model (4.5). Thus, the insights 
from the model appear to be quite robust with respect to various modifications.

4.2.2 A Spatially Explicit Simulation 
Our next step is to make the frontier model spatial and determine how this change 
affects the predicted dynamics. The details of the simulation model are banished 
to the Appendix (Section A.2). Here I give a brief overall description of the 
model, focusing. on ways in which it differs from the nonspatial model (4.5). The 
most important addition is the explicit spatial dimension. The elementary spatial 
unit in the model (a "cell") corresponds to a small regional polity (a chiefdom) 
or a province within a large territorial empire. Cells are arranged on a rectangular 
grid.

Asabiya is tracked at two spatial levels: each cell has a value of asabiya, and 
each empire is characterized by its own value of asabiya, which is the average 
of the asabiyas of all cells belonging to the empire. The asabiya of a cell grows 
logistically (to the upper limit S = I) if the cell is a "frontier" one: that is, 
1For the mathematically inclined readers: remember that I imposed the condition 0 < S <I, so we 
do not care about the S = 0 isocline 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 69 
situated next to a boundary between two empires, or between an empire and the 
"nonimperial hinterland." If a cell is not on a frontier, then its asabiya declines 
exponentially to 0. This is a slightly different implementation of the effect of 
the frontier on asabiya dynamics than that depicted in Figure 4.1. First, rather 
than declining linearly with distance from the border (as in the analytic model), 
the relative growth rate of asabiya is Z shaped: it is flat (and positive) within the 
frontier region, then abruptly declines to a flat (negative) value within the interior.

Second, the width of the frontier region, b, is fixed at the size of one cell.

The dynamics of territorial expansion is modeled in a way analogous to equation ( 4.5). Each empire attempts to expand by attacking cells bordering it. The 
success of expansion is determined by the relative powers of the attacker and 
defender. Power is directly proportional to imperial size, A, and average asabiya, 
S, but discounted by distance between the empire's center and the site of conflict, 
d: P =AS exp[ -dfh]. The parameter h measures how fast power attenuates with 
distance [see equation (2.11) in Section 2.2.1]. The attacker wins if the power it 
brings to bear on the conflict site exceeds the power of the defender by a certain threshold (Ap). Note that this is a more realistic description of the process 
of expansion, because the powers of polities bordering the empire are modeled 
explicitly, rather than implicitly (with a constant, a) as in Model (4.5).

Dynamics Predicted by the Model 
The dynamics of the model are illustrated by a typical realization (Figure 4.4a).

The simulation was initiated with Empire 1, located in the upper central region 
