east (on the northern border of China) to the Carpathians in the west, and beyond 
CASE STUDIES 185 
the Carpathians to the Hungarian plain. Within eastern Europe the grasslandwoodland transition runs in the northeast-southwest direction, roughly through 
the following cultural regions (see Figure 5.1): KAZ, SRU, UKR, and ZAP. In 
addition, the Eurasian steppe curls around the Black Sea into MOL and VLH, and 
there is an extension into central Europe (HUN, the Hungarian plains). Finally, 
the Anatolian Plateau (ANT) can also be considered as an extension, although 
this area belongs to the dry steppe variety.

From at least the times of Cimmerians (the beginning of the first millennium 
B.C.E., Riazanovsky 2000) and until the eighteenth century the grasslands were 
dominated by nomadic pastoralists. The woodlands were inhabited by settled 
agriculturalists since the fourth millennium B.C.E. (Riazanovsky 2000: 13). Thus, 
the forest-steppe transition zone was the locus of a metaethnic frontier throughout 
almost all of its history (and a large chunk of prehistory). Note, however, that the 
steppe frontier was not stationary but tended to sway back and forth (more on this 
below). Furthermore, its intensity tended to wax and wane. Although very little 
is known about the period when the steppe was dominated by the Indo-European 
nomads (Cimmerians, Scythians, and Sarmatians), the cultural difference between 
the agriculturalists and pastoralists may not have been too great. Thus, many 
religious terms in the modem Russian are of Iranian origin, suggesting that there 
were some common elements in the religion of east Slavs and Iranian-speaking 
nomads (Scythians and Sarmatians). Beginning from the late third century c.E., 
the Iranian nomads were replaced on the steppe by repeated waves of Turkic 
and Mongolian peoples. It is likely that the cultural distance across the frontier 
increased as a result of this development. But the greatest intensity was achieved 
by the frontier when two world religions, Christianity and Islam, extended their 
sway over eastern Europe. Settled agriculturalists tended to embrace Christianity, 
while nomads converted to Islam.

The socioethnic complexity of the southern part of the steppe frontier was further enhanced after the seventh century B.C.E. as a result of Greek colonization of 
the northern shore of the Black Sea (Olbia, Chersonesus, Tanais, Pantikapaeum, 
and Phanagoria; see Riazanovsky, 2000:14). This colonization led to the establishment of the Bosporan kingdom, which eventually passed to the Romans and 
then to the Byzantines. As a result of these developments, the Pontic Steppe was 
squeezed between two very different frontiers: the southern frontier between civilized (in the sense of being urban) empires and the steppe (MOL, ZAP, AZV), 
and the northern frontier between the steppe and the settled agriculturalists of the 
woodlands (MOL, ZAP, UKR). The metaethnic frontier theory predicts that this 
area should have been the locus of intense ethnopolitogenesis.

This is precisely what happened (a quick overview is given in Riazanovsky 
2000:13-16). The first strong polity was established by the Scythians, who ruled 
the Pontic Steppe from the seventh to the third century B.C.E. The Scythians were 
defeated and replaced by the Sarmatians (also known as Alans). The Sarmatians 
ruled the area until roughly 200 c.E., when they were defeated by the Goths. The 
Gothic period is dated from 200 to 370 c.E., when Runs-probably a Prototurkic 
people with large Mongol and U grian contingents-arrived on the scene. The Hun 
invasion represented a watershed of sorts, since it and all later nomadic waves 
were non-Indo-European speaking peoples (Ugrians, Turks, and Mongols).

After the defeat of the Ostrogoths and Visigoths by the Huns, the Pontic Steppe 
ceased to be the locus of strong polities. Successive waves of invaders originating 
in central Asia passed through the Pontic Steppe and established their polities 
west or south of it. The center of the short-lived Hun polity was in Pannonia 
(HUN region). Avars (whose invasion is dated to 558 c.E.) and Magyars of the 
ninth century followed in the Huns' steps. Bulgars, by contrast, pressed south 
to the northeastern Balkans, where they established the empire of the Danubian 
Bulgars in the seventh century. At about the same time, another nomadic empire, 
Khazaria, was established to the east, with its center in the Volga Delta. Thus, 
until about 900 c.E., the Pontic Steppe was a contested ground between strong 
polities to the west (Avars, then Magyars), south (Bulgars), east (.Khazars), and 
eventually north (Principality of Kiev, from the ninth century).

The Kievan Prelude 
The origins of the Principality of Kiev are not completely understood and are still 
the subject of some debate among historians. What is clear is that by the ninth 
century, the UKR region was inhabited by Slavs, whenever and however they 
got there (authorities still disagree on this issue). The Slavs of the forest-steppe 
transition zone had partly assimilated Iranian, Baltic, and Finno-Ugric people 
(Novoseltsev 2001). The grasslands were inhabited by nomadic pastoralists, of 
very complex ethnic origins, as indicated in the quick historical summary above.

From the seventh century, the eastern Pontic Steppe was dominated by Khazaria. Khazaria was the first large state in the history of eastern Europe, and 
it exerted a defining influence on the ethno- and politogenesis in this region 
(Novoseltsev 2001). The Khazarian ethnie formed during the sixth and seventh 
centuries probably as a result of an amalgamation of Prototurkic, Ugrian, and 
Iranian elements (Novoseltsev 2001). The core region of the Khazar state was 
located in Daghestan (northeastern Caucasus), which at the time was situated on 
the northern frontier of the Sassanian Empire. The final triggering event leading 
to the crystallization of the Khazarian polity was the invasion of Khazaria by 
the Arabs, after the latter conquered the Sassanian Empire in the middle of the 
seventh century. The Arabs, from their bases in Derbent and on the main passes 
of the Caucasus Mountains, exerted a significant amount of geopolitical pressure 
on Khazaria, eventually even taking the Khazar capital city of Samandar in 737 
(Novoseltsev 2001). In what appears as a classical reflux effect (Section 4.2.2), 
the main thrust of the Khazarian expansion was directed northward (see the map 
in Farrington 2002:83). By the middle of the eighth century, the Khazars ruled 
the Crimea, the lower Don, and the lower and middle Volga areas. According to 
the Russian chronicles, at some point in time, the Polanian Slavs were also subjugated, while other east Slavic groups payed tribute to the Khazars (Novoseltsev 
2001). Thus, by the ninth century, the Slavs inhabiting the UKR region found 
themselves on an imperial frontier of an aggressive and ethnically alien empire.

CASE STUDIES 187 
The last element of the ethnic melting pot in the UKR region was the Scandinavian traders and raiders, referred to as the Varangians in Russian chronicles.

Working from the Baltic Sea, the Scandinavians established a network of settlements along such important trade routes as the Volkhov, Volga, and Dnieper 
Rivers. With time, some of these settlements, most notably Novgorod and Kiev, 
changed in nature from trading posts to the nuclei of territorial chiefdoms, and 
eventually states.

The most powerful of these incipient polities was the Principality of Kiev, or · 
