increases far enough to get the political cycle going. The parameter {3 sets the 
population size at which state revenues fall behind expenses, since Ncrit = I-{3.

Finally, the intrinsic per capita rate of population growth, r, affects the temporal 
extent of the oscillation, since the main determining factor is how long it takes 
for the population to grow to Ncrit· A reasonable estimate of r is 0.02 yr- 1 (or 
2% relative increase per year). Note that r is the intrinsic rate of growth that 
obtains when N is near 0. For more typical densities in the vicinity of N = k/2.

the model predicts per capita growth rates of about 1% per year, which is a 
typical observation for short-term growth periods in historical populations. For 
this estimate of r, the model predicts oscillations of 2-3 centuries in duration 
(Figure 7 .2). This is a quantitative prediction of the model that can be tested 
empirically.

Assessment 
Let us now discuss some of the simplifying assumptions about functional forms 
made during model development. Looking again at Figure 7.1 b, it is apparent 
that the basic argument is quite unaffected by the details of the functional forms 
governing the relationship between population size and per capita surplus production or per capita state expenditures. For example, if we substitute any nonlinear 
(but monotonic) function instead of the assumption of linear decline in per capita 
surplus with population size, then all we will accomplish will be to distort the 
parabola in some way. The basic shape-increase in the revenues followed by 
decrease-will be unaffected, because revenues must be 0 both at the end N = 0 
and the end N = k, and there must be a maximum in between. Similarly, the relationship between expenditures and population size can be nonlinear (in fact, it 
is likely that expenditures will be an accelerating function of N, simply because 
large populations require more bureaucratic layers to control and tax). Again, 
however, the expenditures must increase monotonically with N, and thus it is 
inevitable that at some population size, Ncrit• the revenue and expenditure curves 
will cross, with all the consequences for the state's fiscal well-being that were 
discussed above. The general conclusion seems inescapable: unless the population size can somehow be prevented from crossing the Ncn1 threshold, the state's 
expenses will inexorably grow beyond its means, and the state will inevitably 
become insolvent. Once this point is reached, increasing the tax rate or cutting 
expenses on nonessentials like court luxuries, can at most be a short-term solution. Allowing the state to borrow money (that is, allowing S to become negative 
until the debt hits some maximum value) similarly only postpones the inevitable.

I believe that this conclusion is of extremely high importance to the dynamics 
of agrarian polities. The argument based on the model, however, does not imply 
that all states everywhere inevitably collapse within two to three centuries. But 
having an explicit model allows us to consider how various features of reality 
that are left out from the model may affect its basic message.

First, I should stress that the model is applicable only to preindustrial societies.

It is conceivable that an industrial or even information-based economy may be 
able to expand its productive base by innovation and technology implementation, and thus keep ahead of population growth. However, this option is not open 
to agrarian societies. Traditional societies have a certain stock of technologies 
that they can utilize to intensify production under increasing population pressure 
(Boserup 1966, 1981 ). Eventually, though, the possibilities of further intensification are exhausted (Wood 1998). This is reflected in my assumption that the 
function k(S) must eventually saturate.

Second, the model ignores factors external to the population-state system. In 
particular, a population under severe military pressure from outside may be pre-
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 127 
vented from growing to the equilibrium determined by food production. For example, we can model this situation by adding a density-independent death term, 
-8N, to the logistic equation for N [equation (7.1)]. If 8 is large enough, then 
the population equilibrium will be shifted to the left beyond Ncrit• and the polity 
will remain indefinitely in the region where revenues exceed expenses. However, 
such a situation is likely to affect only smallish polities. In large territorial empires, only borderlands should be affected by external military pressure, while the 
population in the central regions should grow unchecked to the subsistence limits.

Conversely, a state may be successful in conquering adjacent areas. If the society 
pursues an active colonization policy, then population pressure within the empire 
will be relieved. This mechanism, however, should only postpone the inevitable, 
since no agrarian empire can expand its territory without limit.

Third, a society may choose to limit its population growth. Voluntary family 
limitation seems a priori unlikely, because the costs of fewer children are borne 
by individual families, while the problems associated with overpopulation are 
spread societywide. In other words, voluntary limit on reproduction has all the 
earmarks of a collective action problem. However, this may not be an insoluble problem. Furthermore, under certain conditions, family limitation may be a 
rational strategy for individuals to pursue. This is, therefore, an empirical question, to be determined for any particular society: do its members practice family 
limitation? Does family limitation result in a population equilibrium below Ncrit? 
Finally, the state may coercively limit population growth. This can be accomplished indirectly, simply by appropriating more than the surplus production. By 
leaving peasant households with fewer resources than they need to maintain and 
reproduce themselves, such severe taxation may cause a population decline and, 
paradoxically, increase the amount of surplus produced (observe how moving N 
to the left of Ncri1 in Figure 7.1 causes the fiscal surplus to increase). This possibility appears to be the most realistic for historical societies, especially because one 
does not need to assume that states consciously adopt the strategy of population 
reduction. All they need to do is to extort a larger proportion of total production 
from the population, which they have all the incentive to do, if they are anywhere 
near the Ncrit point. Furthermore, empirically most agrarian states at most times 
have been accused of oppressing their productive populations. Therefore, we need 
to explore this possibility further with a model that is more complex than the one 
developed here. The main question is what is the mechanism of state coercion? 
That is, who is doing the coercing in agrarian states? The general answer is the 
elites. They either directly collect taxes from peasants and then transmit them to 
the state, or provide the bureaucrats and military officers for the state apparatus 
that extracts the taxes. In either case, we need to add more structure to the basic 
model and explicitly consider the dynamics of the state, elites, and commoners.

7 .2.2 Adding Class Structure 
My next goal is to expand the theory advanced in the previous section by considering how adding class structure affects the theoretical predictions concerning 
state collapse. To do this, I divide the total population into two socio-economic 
strata: commoners and elites. The development of this theory relies very much 
on insights from Jack Goldstone's demographic-structural theory (199lb).

The basic structure of the model is as follows (see Appendix Section A.3 for the 
derivation and other mathematical details). There are three structural variables: 
population numbers of commoners (peasants, P), population numbers of elites 
