
The Analysis 
Plotting the proportion of Iranian families converting to Islam during each 
25-year period against the midpoint of the period, we obtain the estimated 
curve of conversion to Islam in Iran (Figure 6.4a). Visual inspection of the data 
strongly suggests a logistic-like process. This impression is confirmed by fitting 
the temporal solution of the logistic: 
1 
C(t) = 1 + [(1- 'Y)/'Y]exp[ -rt] 
where the fitting parameters 'Y = C(O} is the initial proportion of converts at time 
t = 0 and r is the relative rate of conversion [the same parameter as in equation 
(6.2)]. This two-parameter curve explains a remarkable 99.98% of the variation 
in the response variable, C(t). This is an excellent fit, even by the standards of 
the physical sciences. By contrast, the noninteractive model explains only 79.2% 
of the variance (note that taken by itself this would be a very respectable result, 
but in comparisons of alternative models with data as the arbiter, it is the relative 
fit that matters; that is, which model performs better and by how much).

Almost identical results are obtained in the analysis of the Spanish data (Figure 6.4b). The logistic curve explains 99.7% of the variance. Interestingly, the 
fitted value of the parameter r is substantially lower than that for Iran (r is 2.8 
century-1 for Iran, but only 1.5 century-! for Spain). Again, the noninteractive 
model fits the data substantially worse (76.6% of the variance explained).

Further evidence in favor of the autocatalytic model (as compared to the two 
alternatives) comes from examining C-C phase plots (Figure 6.5a). The positive 
slope of the curves in the region of C < 0.5 is obvious and needs no statistical 
test. Furthermore, there is no evidence for negative rates of change, which would 
be predicted by the threshold model. Thus, of the three simple alternatives considered in Section 6.2.1, the autocatalytic model provides by far the best description 
of empirical patterns. On the other hand, plotting the data in the phase space has 
revealed some interesting features of the conversion process that were not apparent in the trajectory plot. In particular, the curves appear asymmetric (skewed to 
the right), while the logistic model, of course, predicts a completely symmetric 
Iran 
1 
• data 
"0 -model 
~ 
~ c:: 
8 
c:: 
0 
:e 
0 
Q.

e 
D..

0 
7 8 9 10 
Spain 
• data 
"0 -model 
~ Cl) 
> c:: 
8 
c:: 
~ 0 
Q.

e 
a..

0 
7 8 9 10 11 
Century C.E.

Figure 6.4 Trajectories of conversion to Islam in Iran and Spain. (Data from Bulliet 1979: 
Table 2 and Graph 20) 
parabola. To delve further into this issue, let us look at the relationship between 
relative rates of change and proportion converted indicated by the data (Figure 
6.6a). We see that, while quantitatively there is quite a large difference between 
relative conversion rates (the Iranian process went almost twice as fast), both 
curves have qualitatively same nonlinearities. The observation that the nonlinearity is almost identical in both cases suggests that this is not simply a sampling 
ETHNOKINETICS 
Q) 
C) 
c: 
tU 
.&:.

(.) 
0 
s 
tU 
0::: 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 0.5 
Proportion converted 
1.0 
109 
Figure 6.5 Iran and Spain data plotted on a C-C phase plot. Units of the rate of change 
C are in proportion converted per century.

issue (of course, these are only two replicates). On the other hand, it is still eminently possible that the observed nonlinearities are some artifact of the procedure 
used by Bulliet to extract conversion dates from the genealogies. Let us speculate 
what possible mechanisms may underlie the nonlinearity if it is real (this is a way 
of generating hypotheses for future research). First, the nonlinearity is certainly 
not suggestive of any threshold effect, because that would introduce a nonlinearity 
