compared to large groups. However, the various mechanisms characterizing human sociality, which we discussed in Chapter 3, should reduce the effect of group 
size on asabiya dynamics. Furthermore, the size of the group with which individuals interact is correlated with the location along the imperial center-frontier 
zone dimension, because densely populated cities with large groups of interacting 
people are typically located away from the imperial periphery. Thus, on one hand, 
it is not clear whether group size is a factor that can be isolated from the bundle of factors distinguishing imperial centers from frontiers. On the other hand, 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 55 
there is some difficulty in defining just what the cooperating group might be in a 
city: Is it the whole city? A neighborhood? A guild? Since this issue raises more 
questions than it offers answers, I leave its resolution for the future.

The second factor, also suggested by the group selection theory, is the presence 
of leveling institutions, which has been proposed as promoting the evolution of 
collective solidarity. Central regions of mature empires usually acquire high levels 
of social inequality, implying high intragroup variance in fitness, which should be 
conducive to asabiya declines. Frontiers may or may not develop a high degree 
of egalitarianism, and perhaps one can capitalize on such variation for predictive 
purposes. Again, I leave this idea for future development.

The third factor is the differential in wealth and "civilization" across the frontier. An empire presents both a threat and an opportunity to the frontier tribes.

Vigorous expansionist empires exert an enormous amount of pressure on the 
tribal society, generating a strong incentive for small-level groups to integrate 
into larger ones. But weaker stationary empires also play an integrative role, because they present an irresistible target for raiding, and large groups usually have 
a better chance of acquiring substantial loot. Additionally, empires are a source 
of technologies, ideologies, and trading goods, especially prestige goods that are 
impossible to obtain elsewhere. All this taken together suggests that a metaethnic fault line becomes a much stronger asabiya generator if it coincides with an 
imperial border.

A related mechanism is that metaethnic frontiers are places where very different 
cultures come in contact. Peoples, products, ideas, religious and other concepts 
and practices, human genetic material, microbes, and so on mingle on frontiers 
(Hall 2001). These cultural (and biological) elements may mutate and recombine 
in the contact zone, greatly increasing the overall amount of cultural variation 
on which group selection operates, and, therefore, increasing the rate of cultural 
evolution.

Specific cultural mechanisms enhancing asabiya, as well as maintaining it at a 
high level, clearly play an important role in historical dynamics. One example is 
the spread of a new religion, such as Christianity or Islam. Another example is 
the spread of nationalistic ideology in Europe in the nineteenth century (which 
played an important role in German and Italian unification). However, at this point 
it is not clear to me how we might endogenize such factors in a fruitful manner.

Thus, reluctantly, I must model them as variables exogenous to the currently built 
theory (see also Section 4.1.3).

The Effect of Physical Geography 
The physical environment, in particular, mountains and rivers, should clearly have 
a strong (and quantifiable) effect on the dynamics of collective solidarity. Mountainous terrain makes travel difficult, isolates small groups from each other, and 
inhibits the establishment of the dense interaction networks that are necessary for 
the maintenance of large-scale asabiya. Furthermore, a small polity occupying a 
highly defensible mountain valley has a good chance of avoiding conquest. As a 
result, a mountainous area, even with an intense metaethnic frontier, provides a 
poor environment for asabiya growth and scaling up. There is little incentive for 
small ethnic groups to unite for mutual protection, because each thinks it can do 
as well or even better in its own mountain fastness. It is difficult for an incipient 
empire to unite the area by conquest. Finally, even when conquered, it is difficult 
to fuse the numerous small ethnic groups into a single ethnie.

In contrast to mountains, rivers enhance the flow of people, goods, and cultural 
elements. A riverine environment, therefore, is an excellent place for an ethnic 
group to grow up in scale. Additionally, rivers often serve as trade routes. Access to prestige goods, with which rulers reward their followers, may provide an 
additional stimulus for state building.

The effect of seas on asabiya dynamics is less straightforward. On the one 
hand, seas can connect separate localities. Many sea coasts act very much like 
rivers (with one bank). Certain straits, such as the Dardanelles-Sea of MarmaraBosporus system, can be thought of as simply saltwater rivers. On the other hand, 
seas can also divide. What is particularly nettlesome is that the same sea may 
play both roles during different historical periods. For example, the Mediterranean 
played an integrative role for the Roman Empire, but became a moat between 
Christendom and Islam during the Habsburg-Ottoman conflict era.

Conclusion: The Metaethnic Frontier Theory 
Stimulated by insights from multilevel selection theory, I argue that areas where 
imperial and metaethnic frontiers coincide act as asabiya incubators. Frontier conditions impose an intense selective pressure under which weaker groups with low 
asabiya fragment and are incorporated into stronger groups. Groups with high 
asabiya expand and eventually become full-blown ethnies, unless they encounter 
and succumb to an even stronger group. It is important to emphasize that the 
mechanism of cultural group selection (Boyd and Richerson 1985) does not assume physical extinction of the individuals comprising the losing groups. Furthermore, the mechanism does not even require group extinction, because successful 
strategies can spread rapidly by imitation (Boyd and Richerson 2002).

I should also stress that no claim is made here that the metaethnic frontier 
mechanism is the only way of explaining how new ethnies and empires arise. The 
theory advanced here, however, should be particularly relevant to the "imperial" 
period of agrarian polities (roughly, -3000 to 1800 c.E.). Thus, the theory takes 
the existence of empires for granted-the question of the origins of the state is 
well beyond the scope of the historical dynamics program. (However, metaethnic 
fault lines can arise even in a stateless environment as a result of, for example, 
an invasion of alien tribal peoples. Thus, there are interesting implications from 
the theory for the origin of pristine states, although I cannot pursue them here.) 
If the metaethnic frontier theory has validity, then it explains the cycle of 
empires as follows. We begin with a situation where at least one empire (the "old 
empire") is already present. Its frontier zones, especially where they coincide 
with metaethnic fault lines, create regions of intense cultural evolution leading 
to groups with increased asabiya. In the process of interpolity competition, one 
particular group with a combination of high asabiya, structures allowing it to 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 57 
scale asabiya up, and luck eventually emerges as the winner. This group can 
be either an offshoot of the old imperial ethnie, or a new ethnic group arising 
from the tribal side of the frontier. In either case, the group has a distinct identity, 
