especially in the case of World War I and the 1917 revolution.

9.2.3 Summary 
Despite Russia and France being very different countries, each with its own geography and culture, a number of common themes emerge when we look at their 
history through the lenses of the metaethnic frontier and demographic-structural 
theories. First, both regions experienced two ethnogenetic events: the Franks and 
the French, the Rus and the Russians. All four ethnies arose on metaethnic frontiers. All states went through secular cycles, and there was an intercycle period 
between the Frankish Empire and France and between the Kievan Rus and Russia. Finally, the decentralization phases of secular cycles are almost invariably 
characterized by the fathers-and-sons fine structure, in which instability occurs in 
waves about two generations apart.

Chapter Ten 
Conclusion 
10.1 OVERVIEW OF MAIN DEVELOPMENTS 
In Chapter 1 I outlined a research program for investigating historical dynamics.

The main features of the proposed approach are (I) translation of verbal theories 
into mathematical models, (2) derivation of quantitative predictions from two or 
more alternative theories/models, and (3) empirical tests to determine which of 
the rival theories predicts data best. This general approach worked very well in the 
natural sciences, but can it be applied to social and historical questions? I believe 
it can, and I attempted to show how a consistent application of the approach can 
yield nontrivial advances in the understanding of territorial dynamics of agrarian 
polities.

10.1.1 Asabiya and Metaethnic Frontiers 
Perhaps the most novel development that I discuss in the book is the theory of 
asabiya, the capacity of a group for collective action (Chapter 3). I advanced the 
hypothesis that asabiya increases on metaethnic frontiers and declines in the core 
regions of large polities. I explored this hypothesis with a simple analytical model 
and a more complex spatial simulation, and determined under what conditions we 
should observe repeated cycles of imperial rise and demise (Chapter 4). I then 
developed an empirical apparatus for testing the theory. This turns out to be a 
nontrivial task (and very much work in progress), but such difficulties are probably to be expected when new concepts are advanced and raw empirical facts need 
to be translated into normalized data (Rozov 2000:25). Applying this apparatus 
to the history of Europe during the first and second millennia (Chapter 5), I found 
that the predictions of the theory are borne out by the data. The match between 
theory and data is not perfect, but that is as expected, since all scientific theories 
are at best approximations of reality. Furthermore, an alternative theory, based on 
the geopolitical marchland advantage, does a much worse job of predicting where 
large polities ("empires") originate; in fact, it "guesses" right no more frequently 
than would be expected by chance alone.

I submit that the results of this worked example, which starts with a verbal 
formulation of theory and pushes it all the way through to an empirical test, are 
an indication that the general approach can work in historical applications and 
yield nontrivial insights. Note that the value of this exercise does not depend 
on whether the metaethnic frontier theory continues to be corroborated or is 
ultimately rejected in favor of some better alternative. The important point is 
that, by passing the test successfully, the theory now establishes a standard that 
needs to be bettered, so rejection of it in favor of a better alternative would 
necessarily lead to further advances. Whatever the ultimate explanation, there is 
a striking association between metaethnic frontiers ("civilizational fault lines") 
and the subsequent development of aggressive empires from such regions.

As I argued throughout the book, exclusionary religions such as Christianity 
and Islam play a key role in many metaethnic frontiers. Yet my theory treats 
the appearance of world religions in a particular place as an exogenous event.

As the anonymous reviewer of a previous book draft pointed out, ''the theoretical question is left open: under what conditions do world religions appear, and 
where do they spread, relative to existing geopolitical configurations?" This is an 
excellent question, and I wish I could answer it. However, at this point in time I 
do not have any credible hypotheses about how we could endogenize the spread 
of world religions, so I must leave this issue for future research.

10.1.2 Ethnic Assimilation 
I continued to apply the same approach to two other theories. The first one, the 
kinetics of religious and linguistic assimilation (which I dubbed "ethnokinetics"), 
had been largely developed in a verbal fashion and is still relatively unmathematized. Thus, I was forced to start at the ground level, by considering which of the 
basic modes of growth provides a reasonable starting point for modeling ethnic 
assimilation. Empirical tests with three case studies (conversion to Islam, the rise 
of Christianity, and growth of the Mormon church) uniformly indicate that the 
autocatalytic model does much better than the noninteractive and threshold alternatives. Incidentally, fitting the autocatalytic model to the temporal trajectory of 
proportion converted yields, in one case, a remarkable R2 of 0.9998. This is not a 
result of overfitting, because the model is very simple, with just two free parameters, and the data set is quite large, being based on many hundreds of biographies.

In other words, high degrees of precision are not limited to physical applications.

However, I need to reemphasize the point made in the previous section: it is not 
the absolute value of R2 that matters, but the process by which we arrive at successively better theories. The Islamic conversion example, in fact, illustrates this 
idea very nicely, because a more detailed investigation of the observed patterns 
yielded evidence of a systematic deviation between model predictions and data, 
which allowed us to advance an alternative model that explained this pattern (and 
without adding more parameters).

Despite this encouraging beginning, the study of ethnokinetics is just beginning. Of key importance are two issues. First, how to characterize the social space 
within a polity: where are connections between people dense and where are there 
gaps (fortunately, social networks appear to be a topic of much current interest 
in sociology, so hopefully we can profit from this literature). This is important, 
because assimilation spread can be inhibited by gaps in networks. It is even possible that two alternative stable states become established on each side of the gap, 
as perhaps happened in Iran, where a certain minority never converted to Islam, 
staying Zoroastrian. The second issue is quantitative estimates of coefficients, 
CONCLUSION 199 
such as r, the relative assimilation rate. Thus, the estimated r for Iran was almost 
twice as large as that for Spain (Table 6.1 ). Why did the Iranians convert at twice 
the rate of the Spanish? Furthermore, cases exist where the assimilation process 
reversed its direction (for example, Germanization of the Czechs in the Habsburg 
Empire in the eighteenth versus the late nineteenth century). In short, we need a 
theory that can make predictions about the numerical values of coefficients.

