Rome, do as Romans do" (for a related concept of rational imitation, see Hedstrom 1998). Using this strategy can be advantageous, because the group is often 
"wiser" than an individual, having a longer collective memory and wider range 
of experience than any single individual could obtain alone. The side effect of 
conformity is that it reduces cultural variation within groups, while increasing 
variation between groups, a process that strengthens group-level selection compared to individual-level selection. Boyd and Richerson also developed a theory 
for the cultural evolution of symbolic and ideological markers of group membership (using models of "indirect bias"; see Boyd and Richerson 1985: Chapter 8) 
and for the evolution of moralistic punishment (Boyd and Richerson 1992).

Once symbolically marked adaptation for in-group cooperation stabilized by 
moralistic punishment evolved in small groups, such as bands of paleolithic huntergatherers, an important threshold in human evolution was crossed. Symbolic demarcation allows for large collectives to become designated as cooperating groups.

"Success in intergroup competition came to depend on within-group cooperation; an evolutionary arms race arose. The scale of cooperation-to-compete might 
COLLEGIVE SOLIDARITY 33 
escalate until ecological, rather than evolutionary constraints bring a halt. Once 
the barriers imposed by kinship and reciprocity are breached by cultural group 
selection, it is not clear what the next natural evolutionary limit to scale of cooperation is" (Richerson and Boyd 1998:91-92). Thus, evolution of symbolically 
demarcated boundaries is an example of the "stairway effect" (Turchin 1977:102), 
in which an accumulation of small quantitative changes at some point allows a 
qualitatively large step to be made, rapidly followed by another, and so on. The 
critical theoretical problem is to understand the mechanism for widening the definition of the cooperating collective from a smaller-scale group to a larger-scale 
group. Repeated iteration of the mechanism leads to an ever-larger cooperative 
in-group, until some other force stops the process.

To summarize, evolutionary biologists are beginning to agree that the evolution of human sociality had to involve some kind of group selection. There are 
two versions of the argument, one emphasizing the biological ("genetic") aspect 
(Sober and Wilson 1991), and the other emphasizing the cultural aspect (Boyd 
and Richerson 1985) of group selection. In actuality, the two versions are not 
very far apart, the difference being mostly in the emphasis. Both arguments are 
buttressed by a battery of mathematical models and empirical evidence. For example, group selection has been shown to be a remarkably effective mechanism 
in experiments (Goodnight and Stevens 1997). Another example is the recent experimental demonstration of altruistic punishment in humans (Fehr and Giichter 
2002). In their most recent review, Richerson and Boyd (2001) argue that the theory of cultural group selection passes a number of tests, such as those for logical 
coherence (checked with formal models), verification of the proximal (psychological) mechanisms assumed by the theory, tests for the existence of the necessary 
microevolutionary processes, and examinations of the large-scale comparative 
evidence, including patterns of adaptation and maladaptation.

3.1.3 Ethnic Groups and Ethnicity 
One very important type of human collective is the ethnic group. All of the 
characteristics of human groups that we discussed above are expressed most 
vividly when applied to ethnic groups. Thus, the markers listed in Section 3.1.1-
language, religion, phenotype, and territoriality-are all used in various combinations to draw ethnic boundaries. In fact, as was emphasized by Barth (1969), 
it is not the specific form of the· demarcation markers that is important. The key 
aspect of ethnicity is "the ethnic boundary that defines the group rather than the 
cultural stuff that it encloses" (Barth 1969:15). According to Barth, ethnicity is a 
form of social organization and its main characteristic is self-ascription, as well 
as ascription by others. Different ethnic groups may use different kinds of markers, but the function is the same, to draw boundaries between ''us" and "them." 
This insight has stood the test of time well (Vermeulen and Govers 1994).

Not only do ethnic groups tend to have the sharpest boundaries, they also tend 
to evoke the most intense feelings of solidarity. The ultimate form of collective 
solidarity, sacrifice for the common good, is relatively common in ethnic conflicts.

By contrast. it is hard to imagine individuals sacrificing their lives for the sake 
of a professional organization or a corporation.

Ethnic groups appear to be quintessential human groups. The reason, most 
likely, is that ethnicity was the basis of social organization in humans during most 
of their evolutionary history. Hunter-gatherers living in bands were characterized 
by a very flat social hierarchy and very limited division of labor, and ethnicity 
(in the wide sense, see below) provided the main basis for group formation.

Ethnicity has been defined by Brass ( 1991: 18) as a sense of ethnic identity that 
consists of the subjective, symbolic, emblematic use by a group of people of any 
aspect of culture, in order to create internal cohesion and differentiate themselves 
from other groups. Note that this definition of ethnicity (which I adopt in this 
book) does not specify the nature of the cultural markers that are used for ethnic 
boundary delineation. Thus, two religious sects that share all other cultural characteristics (dialect, phenotype, material culture, etc.) are considered as two separate 
ethnic groups if they use membership in a religious community as the way to distinguish "us" from "them." Thus, the Serbs, Croats, and Bosnians of the former 
Yugoslavia are clearly separate ethnic groups. Although they speak the same language, the religious markers (Orthodox, Catholic, and Muslim, respectively) play 
the dominant role in defining ethnic boundaries. The usage of "ethnic" and "religious" in this book thus differs from the lay meaning of the terms, which are often 
employed as alternative bases for classifying different groups. To avoid misunderstanding of what follows, this point is worth emphasizing: in my view the religious 
identity is just one of the many cultural markers used by groups to delineate ethnic 
boundaries, and it is a particularly important one for agrarian societies (especially 
for demarcating boundaries at the metaethnic level; see below).

3.1.4 The Social Scale 
Even the simplest human societies known to anthropologists are characterized by 
a hierarchical structure with nested levels (Johnson and Earle 2000). Thus, familylevel groups, such as Shoshone or !Kung, have two levels: the family or hearth 
group and the extended family camps or hamlets. The ethnicity of humans who 
lived (and still live) in agrarian societies can have many more layers. The simplest social organization reflecting this principle is the segmentary society, such 
as found in the Berbers of the central High Atlas of Morocco (Gellner 1969).

Complex agrarian societies retain segmentary organization {although they can 
have additional sources of identities). For example, Sahlins (1989) identified the 
following circles of identity characterizing the inhabitants of early modern Cerdanya: village-quarters-Cerdanya-"1\vo Counties" (Roussillon and Cerdanya}-
Catalonia-Spain. Thus, one important dimension along which ethnic groups can 
vary is the social scale. Most people think of themselves as having several ethnic identities, nested within each other. At the smallest scale, an individual is a 
member of a family and local community. Above that level identity may have 
regional, national, and finally "civilizational" (in the sense of Huntington 1996) 
components.

We need better terminology than "region," "nation," and "civilization," each of 
the terms carrying too much extraneous baggage with it. Unfortunately, the terminology has not yet settled down, at least in the English-language literature. Two 
COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY 35 
imported terms are currently used: ethnos and ethnie (the latter will be discussed 
in a subsequent section). Ethnos is widely used in Russian ethnology (Gumilev 
1971; Bromley 1987; Bromley and Kozlov 1989). The most common definition 
runs as follows: ethnos is a stable assemblage of people that historically developed 
within a certain territory; the members of the ethnos possess common, relatively 
stable linguistic, cultural, and psychological characteristics; furthermore, they are 
conscious of their unity as differentiated from other similar human assemblages 
