zero. Thus, the coefficient c is actually a function of collective solidarity.

Let S stand for the average polity-wide level of collective solidarity. I scale S 
to be between 0 and 1, with 0 corresponding to a completely atomized society 
that is incapable of collective action, and 1 corresponding to the maximum solidarity possible for humans. Next, I assume the simplest possible function relating 
the power multiplier to asabiya: c(S) = c0S. In other words, I have assumed 
that geopolitical power is proportional to the product of asabiya and the state's 
resources. Substituting this relationship in the equation, we have 
A= c0AS(1- A/h)- a (4.2) 
I now need to derive an equation for the temporal evolution of S. The first step 
is to choose a law of growth for it. We still lack a well-developed theory that 
would connect micro-level individual actions to macro-level dynamics of asabiya, 
so the next-best approach is to select among the simple models of growth such as 
the four discussed in Sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2. The two boundless growth models 
(linear and exponential) are not good for our purposes, because it is unlikely 
that asabiya can grow without bound, and I have limited it from above by 1, 
anyway. Thus, the real choices are either the asymptotic or the logistic growth.

The asymptotic growth implies that when S is at low level (near zero), it will 
grow linearly. This is also not a good assumption. As discussed in Section 3.2.3, 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 65 
most people are conditional altruists (if they are altruists at all). When they are 
in a minority, conditional altruists are likely to follow selfish strategies, because 
they do not wish to be taken advantage of by free-riders. It is only when there is a 
sufficient number of other (conditional or unconditional) altruists around that they 
will be likely to behave altruistically. This (admittedly crude) argument suggests 
that the initial growth of asabiya should be autocatalytic. In other words, if we 
wish to select one of the four simple models of growth, then it is the logistic that 
matches best the hypothesized dynamics of asabiya growth: 
S = T(A)S(1- S) (4.3) 
Note that I have already made the relative growth rate T a function of A. Figuring 
out the form of this function is our next task.

In the verbal theory advanced earlier in this chapter, I argued that asabiya 
is expected to grow in locations near the imperial boundary and decline in the 
empire's center. Let us assume, for simplicity, that the relative rate of growth 
of asabiya is a linear function of distance from the border (Figure 4.1 ). We see 
that the space is divided into three areas: the "hinterland" outside the empire, the 
"frontier" where asabiya tends to increase, and the "center" where asabiya tends 
to decrease. The parameter To is the maximum relative growth rate, which takes 
place right at the border (x =A), and b is the width of the frontier region (where 
T(x) > 0].

The average polity-wide asabiya is 
1 A ( A) T(A) =A fo T(x) dx =To 1- 2b (4.4) 
r(x) 
Center Hinterland r-----------~--------~--------------x A 
Figure 4.1 The relative growth rate of asabiya, r(x), in relation to the imperial boundary.

Symbols: A is the polity size, b is the width of the frontier zone (thus, the "Center" 
extends from x = 0 to x =A-b, while the frontier is between A-b and A), and r0 is the 
maximum relative growth rate of asabiya, taking place at the boundary x =A.

Substituting this formula into the equation for S, we have 
A= c0AS ( 1 - ~) -a 
S = r0 ( 1 - ~) S(l- S} (4.5) 
The state variables are constrained as follows: 0 < S < 1 and A > 0.

Analysis of this simple model is very straightforward, and can be accomplished 
graphically by looking at the isoclines in the phase space. The isocline for the 
first equation in ( 4.5) is the curve showing all combinations of A and S values for 
which the change in A is zero. The significance of the isocline is that it divides 
the phase space (which graphically represents all possible combinations of A and 
S values) into parts where A either grows or declines (and on the isocline itself, 
where A= 0, A does not change). The isocline for the second equation is defined 
analogously, by setting S = 0. Plotting the two isoclines (Figure 4.2}, we see 
that they intersect at only one point. In other words, the model admits a single 
nontrivial equilibrium point. The stability of the equilibrium is determined by the 
position of the S = 0 isocline in relation to the minimum of the A = 0 isocline.

Thus, the stability is determined by only two parameters: h and b. If 2b > h/2 
(the intersection point is to the right of the minimum}, then the equilibrium is 
stable to small perturbations. The mechanism works as follows. Increasing A also 
increases the area in the center, and causes the average asabiya to decline, which 
pushes the empire boundary back. On the other hand, decreasing A causes S 
to increase, which pushes the border forward. I should add that, in addition to 
the equilibrial dynamics, it is also possible for the polity to fail, if the initial 
combination of S and A is too low. Roughly speaking, if A(O)S(O) < afc, then 
the expansion never starts, and the fledgling polity is destroyed by the pressure 
s 
0 
11 
•Cl) 
..___--~--_J_--------l~A 
2b h/2 h 
Figure 4.2 Isoclines of the asabiya-territory model (the unstable case).

THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 67 
from the hinterland. This is not a novel feature of the asabiya-territory model, 
but a characteristic of the original geopolitical model (see Section 2.2.1 ). In fact, 
the case of 2b > h/2 is not qualitatively different from the geopolitical model 
without asabiya.

If 2b < h/2, then the equilibrium is unstable. The population dynamics are 
characterized by a single boom/bust cycle [assuming that initial power A(O)S(O) 
is over the threshold]. Initially, both A and S increase, but when A exceeds 2b, 
S starts declining. The territorial expansion stops because the empire runs into 
logistic limitations, and S continues to decrease, because the central areas of the 
empire dominate the periphery. Low S eventually means that the empire cannot 
counter the geopolitical pressure from the hinterland. As a result, A begins contracting, first slowly, and then at an accelerating rate. The collapse rate accelerates 
