spread of advantageous genes. A well-known application in social sciences is the 
model of spread of neolithic farmers in Europe (Ammennan and Cavalli-Sforza 
1973). The dynamics of the model are as follows. Suppose we start with initially 
a small number of converts to the new religion (such as a group of disciples fonning around a prophet or messiah). Locally, the conversion process will follow the 
S-shaped logistic curve, initially growing exponentially and then saturating when 
all local people are converted to the new religion. The spatial spread will also initially accelerate, but rather rapidly a well-defined front of advance is established, 
and this front expands with time at a constant velocity. As a result, the total area 
where the majority of people are converted expands linearly in time. Thus, after 
an initial acceleration the number of converts will grow linearly with time until 
the whole available space is taken over.

This orderly front advance observed for thin-tailed contact distributions is in 
great contrast with what happens if the contact distribution has a thick tail. An 
initially small group of converts will grow locally according to the logistic curve, 
as in the previous case. However, as the number of converts builds up, it becomes 
increasingly more likely that one of them will have a long-distance acquaintance 
who will be converted. The most likely mechanism for a proselytizing religion 
is that the initial religious commune would send missionaries out. Such longdistance jumps of the conversion process will prevent formation of an orderly 
front. Instead, we will observe a number of secondary foci of spread forming 
around the original focus, then tertiary foci will appear as a result of missionaries 
sent from the secondary foci, and so on. The whole spatial process will spread 
in an accelerating fashion, and the global number of converts will exhibit an Sshaped growth pattern. The more thick tailed the contact distribution, the more 
closely the global spread process will approximate the logistic.

Threshold Model in Space 
The spatial threshold model behaves in a very different manner from the autocatalytic model (for mathematical details, see Lewis and Kareiva 1993). First, and 
rather obviously, the initial local proportion of converts must exceed the threshold 
C0, otherwise the new cult will die out. Second, and less obviously, the size of 
the area initially occupied by the cult (the "beachhead") must exceed a certain 
threshold. Otherwise, the "diffusive losses" across the boundary will overwhelm 
the conversion rate within the area occupied by the religion, and it will fail. The 
third and most important difference is that the threshold model can exhibit only 
linearly advancing fronts, no matter what the shape of the contact distribution.

This feature arises because any converts that get out too far in advance of the main 
front suffer from the threshold effect: they are locally swamped by nonbelievers.

The other interesting prediction made by the theory is that in well-connected 
space coexistence of two identities is impossible. Suppose a spatial front between 
two identities was somehow established. Then it will always advance in one 
direction or another. In the specific fonn of the threshold model proposed above 
ETHNOKINETICS 
~ ~ c: 
8 
c: 
0 
:e 
g_ 
e 
a.

1 .... -------- , / I .

(a) I / I (b}·/ 
I / I 
I 
Time 
103 
Figure 6.2 Schematic patterns of spread predicted by spatial contact models: (a) autocatalytic process and thick-tailed contact distribution, {b) autocatalytic process and thin-tailed 
contact distribution, and (c) threshold process.

[equation (6.3)], the direction of advance depends on whether C0 > 0.5 or not. If 
yes, then the core identity will lose; otherwise, it wins (Lewis and Kareiva 1993).

However, if social intercourse across the boundary is substantially less than on 
each side, then stable coexistence is possible (e.g., Levin 1976).

Summary: The Three Types of Growth in Spatial Contact Models 
To summarize, the spatial models reviewed in this section predict three distinct 
patterns of conversion or assimilation process. These patterns are schematically 
illustrated in Figure 6.2a. The fastest spread occurs in the autocatalytic model with 
thick-tailed contact distributions. In this case, the process of conversion begins 
to grow at an accelerating rate in the locality of the initial group of converts.

Before this process can reach the phase where it is locally saturated (as a result 
of locally converting most of the population), the conversion process jumps to 
several other locations, which fuel further growth, and also generate further foci 
of spread. As a result, the conversion dynamics are explosive. The thicker is the 
tail of the contact distribution, the faster all points in the total area we model are 
reached. If the tails are essentially flat on the scale of the whole area, then the 
spatial process will be indistinguishable from the nonspatial logistic dynamics.

By contrast, if the tail of the contact distribution attenuates rapidly (the thintail case), then we should first observe a "latent period" during which no spread 
occurs (this is the time when local numbers of converts are building up), followed by an accelerating growth period. Eventually, a spatial front between the 
converted and unconverted areas is established. This front advances at a constant velocity, which results in a linear spread until the whole area is eventually 
converted [curve (b) in Figure 6.2].

Finally, if the conversion process is characterized by a threshold, then the shape 
of the contact distribution does not matter. If the conversion process is viable 
(which requires a sufficient initial mass of converts, not too high a conversion 
threshold C0 , and not too great losses of converts by diffusion), then a spatial front 
between the converted and unconverted areas becomes rapidly established. The 
front then advances linearly, but more slowly than in the autocatalytic case. The 
reason for the slower rate of spread is because, in order for the front to advance, 
the numbers of converts at the boundary must build up past the threshold C0 • In 
the autocatalytic case, by contrast, the conversion process can spread even when 
locally at low density. Thus, in the threshold case, the front is "pushed" by high 
numbers of converts behind it. In the autocatalytic case, the front is "pulled" 
by the interactions of low numbers of converts with the unconverted population& 
ahead of it.
