the Rus Kaganate (as it was referred to in the Arabian sources). The Rus Kaganate 
was a federation of elite warriors living on trade and booty and drawing tribute 
from the Slavic, Baltic, and Finnish agricultural peoples of the forest and foreststeppe land {Hosking 2001:33). At this stage in its development, the Kievan 
polity was a rather typical complex chiefdom, with the Great Prince in Kiev 
as the paramount chief, and princes of various East Slavic tribes as subordinate 
chiefs. The cohesive forces holding this polity together were rather standard for 
a frontier "barbarian" tribal confederation: defense and predation.

Settled agriculturalists living on Europe's steppe frontier had always had to 
deal with raiding by the nomads. During the eighth and ninth centuries, as stated 
above, many east Slavic tribes had to pay tribute to Khazaria. After 900, however, 
the intensity of raiding pressure on east Slavs intensified, because a new steppe 
polity, the Pechenegs (or Patzinaks ), broke through the area controlled by the 
Khazars (Novoseltsev 2001) and established itself in the Pontic Steppe (Hosking 2001:34). As I pointed out above, there were no large-scale nomadic polities 
based in this area {ZAP and AZV) during the previous five centuries. It is probably not by chance alone that the Principality of Kiev coalesced practically at the 
same time as the Pecheneg Confederation. The mechanism underlying the rise of 
the Pechenegs was probably similar to that described by Barfield {1989) for the 
interaction between agrarian societies of China and nomadic empires of central 
Asia, and modeled in Section 7.2.3. This hypothetical dynamic can be quickly 
sketched as follows. Varangians based in Kiev using their military superiority 
impose tribute on the surrounding Slavic tribes, perhaps offering them increased 
protection from the competing predators of the steppe. Steppe dwellers now have 
to increase the size of their war parties in order to overcome the stronger defenses 
of the agriculturalists. Additionally, a concentration of both staple and prestige 
goods in Kiev and eventually other towns presents a greater incentive for scaling up the political organization on the steppe. As a result, pressure from the 
steppe significantly increases. This provides extra centralizing incentives for agriculturalists, and the positive feedback loop causes both polities, the agrarian and 
the nomadic, to centralize until the process is stopped by ecological and logistic 
constraints.

Mutual defense was not the only force generating scaled-up asabiya in the 
Kievan Rus. Varangians, the warrior elite of this polity, were notable predators 
themselves. The richest target was Constantinople, and a number of raids were 
directed against the Byzantine Empire, including the campaigns of Oleg and lgor 
in the tenth century. Furthermore, under Prince Sviatoslav (the second half of the 
tenth century) the Rus sacked the capital of the Volga Bulgars, delivered a death 
blow to Khazaria, and captured the capital of the Danube Bulgarians. Both the 
necessity of gathering the large forces needed to overcome these powerful polities 
and the enhanced reputation resulting from the success must have been powerful 
sources of collective solidarity for the Rus warrior elites.

It would be interesting to speculate why the Kievan state coalesced in the 
UKR (and not in the SRU or ZAP) region. History books stress the importance of 
trade (see, for example, Kliuchevskii 1911 on the importance of waterways). This 
hypothesis is supported by the current anthropological theory that emphasizes the 
importance of prestige goods in the evolution of chiefdoms (Earle 1997). Eastern 
Europe of the second half of the first millennium had two main trading routes, one 
associated with the Dnieper and the other with the Volga. It is interesting to note 
that the loci where the Dnieper and Volga trading routes intersect the woodlandssteppe transitional region were both centers of intense political development at 
about the same time (Kiev in UKR and Great Bulgar in KAZ). Similarly, the next 
great trade artery is the Danube, which is precisely where the Danubian Bulgars 
established their state.

An important event for the metaethnic landscape of eastern Europe was the 
arrival of world religions toward the end of the first millennium. The first was 
Judaism, which was adopted as the state religion in Khazaria. However, Judaism 
had very little impact on the area after the fall of Khazaria in the tenth century.

The Volga Bulgars were Muslim, and were instrumental in converting Mongols 
to Islam during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Eventually, all nomads 
in eastern Europe became Muslim (apart from a later intrusion of the Buddhist 
Kalmyks). By contrast, the Slavs and other agricultural people converted to Orthodox Christianity. Thus, the religious frontier that emerged during the early 
second millennium coincided with the economic frontier dividing agriculturalists 
from pastoralists. This development resulted in a significant deepening of the 
metaethnic fault line running through eastern Europe.

Russian Ethnogenesis 
The locus of Russian ethnogenesis was northeastern Rus, also known as VladimirSuzdal Rus. Right away I should state that by "locus" I do not mean a precisely 
delineated area. Thus, Moscow itself, the Volga-Oka mesopotamia, the northeastem Rus, and the rest of the formerly Kievan lands, as well as the Golden Horde 
to the east, all contributed to the process of Russian ethnogenesis, but the importance of these contributions varied, generally decreasing with greater distance 
from Moscow.

Vladimir-Suzdal Rus was a northeastern frontier of the Principality of Kiev 
(note that I use "Rus" to refer to the pre-Mongolian period, and "Russia" to the 
period after Mongolian conquest; because the core regions of Rus and Russia 
were distinct, "northeastern Rus" became "central Russia"). On the eve of the 
Mongolian conquest, it was inhabited by people who were some kind of mixture 
of Baltic, Finnish, and Slavic tribes. Some Russian historians (e.g., Kliuchevskii 
1911) argued that northeastern Rus was populated as a result of massive colonization by the Slavs. Others (Paszkievicz 1983) thought that the Great Russians 
CASE STUDIES 189 
were simply a slavicized Merya (a Finnish tribe that inhabited the Volga-Oka 
mesopotamia). Whatever the details, it is clear that the population of northeastem Rus during the first few centuries of the second millennium was increasingly 
assimilated to the Slavic language and Orthodox Christian religion. At the same 
time it was subjected to one of the most intense and prolonged metaethnic frontiers in European history.

In the eleventh century, the northeastern frontier of the Kievan Rus had a 
rather mild quality. It was a frontier between Slavic-speaking Christians and 
largely Finnish-speaking pagans. Additionally, Kievan Rus had an increasingly 
urban culture and, as population densities grew, more intense agriculture than 
indigenous peoples. On the other hand, it is likely that the process of Christianization of Slavs was gradual (see Chapter 6). Meanwhile, non-Slavic people were 
increasingly converted to Christianity.

During the twelfth and especially the thirteenth century, the steppe frontier advanced north. This occurred partly as a result of decentralization processes within 
the Kievan polity (see below), and partly because of the arrival of new nomadic 
hordes from central Asia: first the Cumans (Polovtsy) in the mid-eleventh century, then Mongols two hundred years later. In the twelfth century the core of the 
Kievan state was both the site of internecine warfare between various Ryurikid 
factions, and the subject of increasing raiding pressure from the Cumans. As population density declined and many settlements were abandoned, nomad raiders 
had to press further north in quest of booty and slaves. In the thirteenth century, 
both the Cumans and East Slavic principalities were decisively defeated by the 
Mongols. Although northeastern Rus became part of the Golden Horde, it did not 
lead to a cessation of pressure from the steppe. First, the Mongols did not rule 
