Berbers living inland. Thus, there is an ethnic boundary dividing these two ethnies. The ethnic distance separating Arabs and Berbers, however, is not very 
large. Although Arabs lived in wealthy civilized states, these states were generally too weak to exert much pressure on Berber tribal communities. Additionally, 
both ethnic groups professed Islam, which is therefore a factor that unifies rather 
than divides them. Although several Berber dynasties were established by religiously motivated groups belonging to a different sect from the settled areas, such 
a sectarian difference is not as large as, say, the Muslim/Christian fault line. In 
short, the ethnic distance between Arabs and Berbers is moderate, and therefore 
we should expect that it would exert a moderate pressure for asabiya to scale 
up. And, indeed, the historical record shows that desert-originating dynasties in 
North Africa built only region-sized polities.

The contrast between the regional Maghrebin polities and large territorial empires build by Turco-Mongolian ethnies, to which I referred in Section 3.2.1, appears to be very interesting in light of the theory just advanced. Turco-Mongolian 
tribes, of course, originated from one of the most prominent and long-standing 
metaethnic fault lines in Eurasia, the Chinese-Inner Asian frontier. The ethnic 
gulf between the nomads of Central Asia and Chinese agriculturalists was very 
deep, since they did not share either religion or language (or economic way of 
life, obviously). Asian nomads faced (most of the time) a huge and powerful 
territorial empire, China. Thus, in order to successfully resist its pressure and 
have any chance of obtaining prestige goods from it by raiding or extortion, 
Turco-Mongolian nomads had no choice but to evolve structures for large-scale 
asabiya. In this fashion, steppe polities were a reflection of agrarian polities on 
the other side of the frontier, as was brilliantly argued by Barfield (1989). But 
then we might ask, why did agrarian polities on the North African frontier reach 
only regional size, while on the Inner Asian frontier they typically expanded to 
imperial size? The theory advanced in this chapter suggests that the evolutionary 
pressure for scaling up affected not just the nomads, but both sides of the frontier. On the Inner Asia frontier, the scaling-up dynamic operated until checked by 
geopolitical constraints, resulting in huge empires on both sides of the frontier.

In the Maghreb, by contrast, as soon as polities reached medium size, the ethnies 
across the frontier were no more alien than other ethnies on the same side. Thus, 
a more shallow ethnic divide should, and did, produce smaller-scale asabiyas and 
polities.

External Conflict-Internal Cohesion Theory 
Social theorists have long known that conflict between groups tends to increase 
internal cohesion (Simmel 1955; Coser 1956). Conflict sets boundaries between 
groups and strengthens group consciousness (Coser 1956:34). Simmel and Coser 
also make the important observation that severe conflict can either break a group 
or increase its internal cohesion. The most important factor affecting the outcome 
seems to be the initial degree of group consensus. If a group is lacking in basic consensus, an external threat may lead to apathy, and the group disintegrates 
(Coser 1956:93). A group that enjoys some degree of initial cohesiveness, on 
the other hand, is likely to emerge from the conflict greatly strengthened. This 
observation is consistent with how I envision ethnogenesis in the frontier zone.

Certainly not every ethnic group will immediately enjoy an increase in asabiya 
upon finding itself next to the frontier. Most groups will perish in the pressure 
cooker of a metaethnic frontier (note that, when a group disappears, it does not 
necessarily mean that all or even most of its members are physically destroyed).

Other groups will survive but will be unable to scale up without disintegrating.

Very few groups, by chance or conscious design, will be able to hit on the combination of norms and structures that will enable them to survive and expand.

Frontiers in History 
There is an enormous literature on frontiers. Some directions, such as the "frontier thesis" of Turner (1921) and related literature, are not particularly useful 
to our purposes. Highly relevant is the observation made by McNeill (1963:60) 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 61 
about "a long line of lords marcher who created empires by successfully exploiting a strategic position on the frontier between civilization and barbarism." One 
example that McNeil cited was the Akkadian Empire. McNeill (1963:249) also 
pointed out that almost all the states that unified China in a single empire originated on the margins of the Chinese world (one exception was the Ming). The 
importance of the frontier between the agrarian China and steppe-dwelling nomads was stressed by Lattimore (1967), and more recently in an excellent study 
by Barfield (1989). Service (1975) made a similar observation about the frontier 
origin of Egyptian unifiers. Other examples of well-studied frontiers in history 
are: the Roman (Dyson 1985; Whittaker 1994; Williams 1997), medieval Europe 
(TeBrake 1985; Bartlett and Mackay 1989; Bartlett 1993; Abulafia and Berend 
2002), and Europe's steppe frontier (McNeill1964), as well as the Russian part of 
it (Wieszynnski 1976). Several general frontier studies are by Savage and Thompson {1979), Donnan and Wilson (1999), and Power and Standen (1999). I have 
already mentioned the civilizational fault lines of Huntington (1996).

From this highly incomplete list it is clear that there is a consensus that frontiers played an extremely important role in history. However, the reasons that 
made frontiers important are not completely clear. There seem to be two general 
explanations offered in the historical and sociological literature. The first one, the 
advantages of marchland position, was already discussed in Chapter 2. Note that 
this theory is in a sense the diametrical opposite of the theory that I advance.

Whereas Collins argues that marchland position protects states from predation by 
neighbors, I postulate that frontier location, on the contrary, puts a lot of pressure on ethnic groups, so that only the most capable survive. Thus, in my theory, 
frontier location is destructive in the short run but constructive in the long run.

Since the two theories offer different predictions, we have here the possibility for 
an empirical test (which is pursued in Chapter 5).

The second common explanation is based on diffusion of technology. For example, "the Akkadians were in a favorable position to unite barbarian prowess 
with civilized technique to form a powerful military force" (McNeill 1963:60). I 
have already commented on a related aspect, that metaethnic frontiers are characterized by a great amount of cultural variation, which, according to the theory 
of multilevel selection, should speed up cultural evolution. As to the purely technological aspect, I am somewhat dubious about its explanatory power regarding 
success at territorial expansion, at least in the long run. However, the final arbiter 
of this issue is data, and it should be possible to design an empirical test for 
distinguishing between these two hypotheses.

Semiperipheries in the World-Systems Theory 
The world-systems theory was formulated by Wallerstein (1974, 1980, 1989), and 
later developed in various directions by other authors (for an overview, see the 
recent volume edited by Denemark et al. 2000), so that at this point in time it is 
more of a research program, rather than a single theory. One basic premise shared 
by researchers working within the world-systems paradigm is that the dynamics 
of any single polity or society are not endogenous, but are a consequence of 
complex interactions among local, regional, and global processes (Chase-Dunn 
and Hall 1997). An extremely important kind of spatial interaction is between 
core and periphery regions within the world-system (in fact, world-systems can 
be conceptualized as core-periphery structures; Hall 2001). Core/periphery differentiation exists when two societies systemically interact and one has higher 
