model is tailored to a specific society, in which the elites practiced polygamy, I 
set rmax = 0.08 yr- 1 at four times the intrinsic rate of population increase typical 
for preindustrial populations. My justification for this assumption is that the legal 
maximum of wives that a Muslim man could have is four. Of course, in Islamic 
societies many high-rank individuals would have large numbers of concubines and 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 133 
would usually acknowledge their sons as legitimate heirs. This practice would 
lead to a much higher rate of population growth. On the other hand, poorer 
members of the elite might be unable to afford the full complement of legal 
wives. On balance, I believe that a multiplier of four is a reasonable one to 
choose as the reference value for Islamic societies (as is usual in theory building, 
we will need to determine how variation in this and other parameters affect the 
model predictions).

The next key assumption of the model is that as long as per capita income 
generated from rents exceeds the minimum acceptable income, (I - y)R/ E > 
/Lmin• the state and elites live in harmony. However, if elite numbers grow to 
the point where their per capita incomes fall below /Lmin• then nobles become 
dissatisfied, and will use a variety of usual techniques to divert some of the taxes 
into their pockets (as discussed in the previous section). The model makes the 
assumption that at this point /L = /Lmin• that is, the elites steal just enough from the 
state to be able to maintain what they perceive as the minimal standard of living 
appropriate to their station. If elite numbers grow to the point where R/ E < /Lmin• 
that is, there is not enough extracted resource to satisfy all the nobles, even if 
the state gets no taxes, then the model assumes that /L = R/E. In other words, 
at this point the nobles divide all extracted resource among themselves, and the 
state gets nothing.

The state fiscal dynamics are modeled as usual, with revenues as described 
above, and the expenditures proportional to the elite numbers. Thus, the dynamics of S, the accumulated state resources, follows the typical trajectory, in which 
S grows during the early period of the dynasty, because elite numbers are few and 
their appetites are modest. At some point, however, the revenues drop to the point 
where they cannot match expenditures, and S declines and eventually become 0.

At this point, the model assumes that the dynasty failed. The state becomes vulnerable to conquest, which (at least in the model) happens immediately, because 
the desert tribes provide a ready and spatially adjacent source of the next dynasty.

A typical trajectory predicted by the model is illustrated in Figure 7 .4a.

Note that I chose to frame this model in economic (or fiscal) terms. However, 
we can easily cast the model in terms of collective solidarity (asabiya). For example, we can reinterpret S as the asabiya of the elites supporting the current 
dynasty (the conquering tribesmen and their descendants). Then, at the beginning 
of the dynasty, asabiya is high, and it stays high until elite numbers reach the 
threshold where per capita income falls below the minimal acceptable level. At 
that point, intraelite competition intensifies, and the asabiya begins to decline.

When asabiya reaches a certain threshold, the dynasty (and the state) collapses, 
and is replaced by a new tribal group from the desert. The dynamics of such a 
model are essentially identical to those shown in Figure 7 .4a.

A numerical investigation of the effect of parameter values on the dynamics of 
the lbn Khaldun model indicates that the main parameters that affect the period 
of the cycle are the maximum rate of elite population increase (r max) and the rate 
at which the minimal acceptable income grows with time. Rather rapid cycles 
of about one century in period, shown in Figure 7 .4a, obtain for high values 
0 100 200 300 
(b) 
0 100 200 300 
Time 
Figure 7.4 (a) Dynamics of the lbn Khaldun model: elite numbers, E (solid line) and 
accumuljlted state surplus S (broken line). (b) Dynamics of the parasitic nomad model: 
elite numbers (solid line) and elite asabiya S (broken line).

of r max that should be typical for societies where elite polygamy is widespread.

By contrast, reducing rmax to 0.02 leads to longer cycles, of around 1.5 centuries.

Now that we have some understanding of the dynamics predicted by the lbn 
Khaldun model, it would be a good idea to investigate the effects of some of the 
simplifying assumptions we employed to derive the model. Probably the most 
drastic simplification was the assumption that we can neglect the commoner dynamics. To check on the validity of this approximation, I developed a more complex Ibn Khaldun model with class structure (see the Appendix for equations).

This model predicts essentially the same dynamics for E and S as the simple lbn 
Khaldun model (Figure 7 .Sa). Additionally, it reveals the commoner dynamics 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 
1/) 
(I) 
:0 
ea 
·;:: 
ea 
> 
0 
0 
100 
100 
200 
200 
135 
(a) 
300 400 500 
(b) 
300 400 500 
Time 
Figure 7.5 Dynamics of the lbn Khaldun model with class structure. E: elite numbers, 
S: accumulated state surplus, and P: commoner numbers. (a) Dynamics with high elite 
reproduction rate and limited extraction ability. (b) Dynamics with low elite reproduction 
rate and high extraction ability.

during the elite cycle. We see that the growth of the commoner population is 
