80 
-CD 
~ 60 Cl) 
0) 
g 
Cl) 40 c: 
~ .E 
r:: 
0 
:= 
tU 
'3 20 Q.

0 
a..

-2 -1 0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 
Century 
Figure 8.3 Population dynamics of China from 200 B.C.E. to 1710 c.E. (data from Chao 
and Hsieh 1988). Vertical lines indicate where data were split.

Additionally, the nature of the periodicity is complex, with several oscillations 
appearing to be superimposed on each other. Thus, in the second and third pieces, 
there appear to be two coexisting oscillations: a short one with the period of 
1.3-1.5 centuries, and a longer one with a period of 3-4 centuries. Given such 
variability in periodicity estimates among the three series, we should take these 
results with a grain of salt: the evidence for periodicity in the Chinese data 
is not strong. By contrast, the evidence for second-order dynamics is completely 
consistent across replicate series and time-delay choices (Table 8.1 ). To conclude, 
although the results of this analysis should be interpreted cautiously, given the 
uncertainty associated with estimates of Chinese population numbers, it provides 
important confirmatory evidence to the detection of second-order oscillations in 
western European data.

Population reconstructions for other areas are not as good as those for western 
Europe and China and thus not suitable for formal time-series analysis. One example is the very interesting data presented by Whitmore and eo-workers (Whitmore et al. 1993) on population dynamics in Mesopotamia, Egypt, Yucatan, and 
the central Mexican plateau. These data show that the typical state of human 
populations is not stasis or slow growth, but oscillations-periods of growth interspersed with periods of decline (sometimes very sharp). Unfortunately, the data 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 161 
are not sampled frequently enough to be useful for time-series analysis. Interestingly, Whitmore and eo-workers suggest that the "pace" of human dynamics has 
greatly increased with history, so that oscillations (or "waves," as they call them) 
in the distant past were slow, taking many millennia to complete their course, 
while oscillations in the more recent past are only a few centuries in period. My 
problem with this generalization is that it could easily arise as an artifact of our 
incomplete knowledge of history. Since early history is much less known than 
more recent history, it is quite possible that we "missed" many more instances of 
population decline in the distant compared to the proximate past. Such a systematic bias could produce the same pattern of apparently accelerating oscillations.

A possible example is the case of Maya population history. The first archaeologists who studied the ruins of the Maya civilization did not even suspect that 
at some point in their history Maya societies sustained highly dense populations.

The original picture was that of ceremonial centers embedded in a matrix of rainforest cultivated by swidden agriculturalists. Later archaeological work showed 
beyond any degree of reasonable doubt that at their peak (or, more likely, peaks) 
Mayan societies cultivated large areas very intensively. Accordingly, early reconstructions proposed a long period-more than 1000 years-of very slow increase, 
followed by a rapid (1 century) collapse. Even more recent evidence shows that 
there were repeated cycles of centralization followed by state collapse in the uplands of Guatemala and Peten (Culbert and Rice 1990). Thus, it is becoming 
clear that Mayan population history was quite complex, although we will have 
to wait for more archaeological data and better methods before we have a data 
series suitable for analysis by the methods discussed in this book.

8.3.2 Archaeological Data 
The methods of archaeology offer great promise for resolving many current controversies about the dynamics of historic (and prehistoric) populations. A general 
problem with archaeological sources of population estimates is that they are indirect. They rely on a physical record left by humans: most often, on the number 
of houses or settlements that were occupied at a certain period in time. Human 
density can also be estimated by the amount of food they grew, using, for example, pollen cores. The problem in all these cases is to translate the quantitative 
measures of human activities in the archaeological record into the number of people. For example, if we have an estimate of how many structures were present 
at some point in time, we need to also know how many people, on average, inhabited each structure. I note that this is not an insurmountable problem. In fact, 
in population ecology researchers often rely on indices of population density that 
may even be nonlinearly related to density itself (an example is the data on the 
famous 10-year cycle in lynx fur returns). Furthermore, our primary interest is 
in relative population fluctuations, which are easier to document than absolute 
population densities.

The great advantage of archaeological methods is that they offer a potentially 
more objective way of reconstructing population history. These approaches clearly 
can have biases and require a lot of thought in real-life applications (Dewar 
1991; Curet 1998), but generally the amount of subjectivity and guesswork is 
reduced.

As I stated in Section 8.2, to be useful for our purposes, a population history 
must be sampled at no longer than 50-year intervals. Thus, most population estimates published in the archaeological literature are not yet suitable for analysis.

An example of a data set that comes close is a very interesting reconstruction 
of the population history of the Deh Loran Plain in the Middle East (Dewar in 
Neeley and Wright 1994:211), which shows at least three huge oscillations in 
density (ten-fold peak/trough ratios). However, the sampling interval is around 
200-300 years, which is much too sparse for formal analysis.

There are, however, several examples in which the sampling rate is starting to 
approach the one we need. The first example relates to the question of the population history of the Roman Empire, which has been hotly debated for decades 
(Scheidel 2001). The issue is what role depopulation may have played in the 
collapse of the Roman Empire. The problem is that the first evidence of depopulation shows up as early as the later decades of the Republic (Brunt 1971 ). A 
remarkable data set, recently published by Lewit ( 1991) throws a new light on 
this problem (Figure 8.4 ). It turns out that there were two episodes of settlement 
abandonment in the Roman Empire: during the third and fifth centuries. The 
third-century decline (and the fourth-century revival) must have involved quite 
substantial changes in population numbers, since change in the proportion of settlements occupied underestimates the amplitude of population change. These data 
are discussed further in Section 9.1.

100 
