action). The historical record provides several kinds of quantitative data that can 
be used to measure the degree of solidarism among individuals of a certain group, 
such as the willingness to provide recruits for the army and to pay taxes. The 
last variable, the tax rate to which the populace acquiesces, can be quantified for 
many different societies and historical periods. Several caveats should be kept 
in mind, mainly who is paying and for the benefit of what group. Thus, the tax 
rates imposed on the peasants may reflect more the degree of coercion that the 
elites can bring to bear on them, rather than any feelings of ethnic solidarity 
(although I would argue that we should not assume that lower strata will a priori 
lack any degree of ethnic solidarity with the elites ). Similarly, alloethnic elites 
may be reluctant to contribute to an empire that recently conquered them. Tax 
rate as a measure of asabiya is probably least problematic when applied to the 
core ethnie's elites.

Furthermore, even groups of very high asabiya should not be expected to consist of pure unconditional altruists. In fact, the more commonly found altruistic 
strategy is to perform individually costly group-beneficial behaviors only if others 
are doing the same. An example of such behavior is the quasivoluntary compliance of citizens in paying taxes (Levi 1988:52). It is voluntary because taxpayers 
choose to pay rather than free-ride (and, therefore, it is not a rational, or selfinterested behavior). It is quasivoluntary because taxpayers contribute only if they 
have reasonable assurances that free-riders will be punished. Nobody cares to be 
a dupe.

An interesting approach to measuring collective solidarity is suggested by Douglass North. Sociologists distinguish four general sources of power, based on the 
use and manipulation of norms and symbols (ideological), administrative structures (political), material incentives (economic), and coercion (military) (Mann 
1986; Turner 1995). Collective solidarity clearly belongs to the first class. In fact, 
North explicitly defines ideology in solidaristic terms: "Ideology consists of the 
set of individual beliefs and values that modify behavior." Then he adds: "It can 
be measured by the premium people are willing to incur not to free ride" (North 
1985:394).

3.3 SUMMARY 
• Human groups constitute an intermediate level of organization between individuals and polities. Instead of attempting to connect polity dynamics directly to individual action, I build the theory in two steps: first inferring 
group dynamics from interactions between individuals, and then inferring 
polity dynamics from interactions between groups.

• Not all collections of individuals are true groups. Groups arise because their 
members draw imaginary boundaries separating in-group from out-group individuals (''us" versus "them"). Humans use a variety of recognition markers 
to distinguish between group members and outsiders, such as language, religion, and phenotype.

• Group members are capable of solidaristic behaviors that impose costs on the 
individual performing the behavior, but yield group-level benefits. (I distinguish solidaristic from altruistic behaviors: whereas the latter benefit other 
individuals, the former benefit the group as a whole.) Solidaristic and altruistic behaviors are not rational (they are "extrarational"), and are based not 
on calculated self-interest, but on norms. Thus, human motivation is only 
partly self-interested (although this might be a very large part, and in some 
individuals the only part).

• Theory suggests that solidaristic behaviors can evolve by a variety of multilevel selection mechanisms: kin selection and group selection acting on 
genetic and/or cultural traits. Group selection, especially its cultural variant 
espoused by Boyd and Richerson, has strong theoretical and empirical support, and provides the main mechanism for evolution of solidarism in large 
human groups.

• Several characteristics of human behavior and sociality promote the evolution of solidaristic behaviors. Leveling institutions (monogamy, food sharing) 
reduce within-group phenotypic variability, and consequently the strength of 
individual-level selection. Certain psychological mechanisms guard against 
free-riding (cheater detection circuits and norms to punish free-riders). Conformism is the mechanism that ensures that group members share norms and 
react similarly to the same behavioral stimulus (and also reduces withingroup phenotypic variability).

• As a result of boundary demarcation, solidarism, and uniformity-causing 
behaviors, groups of individuals can act as independent agents in their own 
right.

• Different groups vary in their capacity for collective action. This capacity 
is a result of a complex mix of individual behaviors: the proportion of solidarists in the group and the strength of their solidarism, the denseness and 
nature of social networks within which individuals are embedded, the ability 
to detect and punish free-riders (including higher-level norms that detect and 
punish those who do not punish cheaters), and the self-organization capacity 
(for example, selecting and obeying a leader). The group capacity for concerted collective action is called collective solidarity or asabiya, using the 
terminology of lbn Khaldun.

• Groups characterized by higher asabiya tend to survive, expand, and replicate 
themselves at the expense of groups with lower asabiya.

• One of the most important kinds of human collective is the ethnic group.

The importance of ethnically based groups is, first, that they tend to invoke 
the highest level of group loyalty. Second, during most of human evolution 
groups were based on shared ethnicity.

• Individuals are embedded in a system of hierarchically nested ethnic 
groups-family, community, subethnie, ethnie, and metaethnie. Each group 
level has its own degree of asabiya. Thus, it is possible to have a high 
degree of collective solidarity at, for example, the subethnic level, but low 
solidarity at the ethnic level. The variation in collective solidarity with 
ethnic group level can potentially be quantified with "asabiya profiles." 
COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY 49 
I should stress here that, while lbn Khaldun was concerned with asabiya of 
small- or medium-sized groups, I reformulate and broaden his concept to 
apply to groups of any scale, up to and including such huge metaethnies as 
Latin Christendom or Dar al-Islam.

• Groups in agrarian societies are formed on the basis of two main characteristics: ethnicity and socioeconomic stratum (most importantly, peasants 
and elites). I propose the hypothesis that the fortunes of a polity are primarily affected by the capacity of its elites for collective action. However, 
ethnic solidarity (or lack of it) between elites and peasants may also be very 
important in polity success or failure.

Chapter Four 
The Metaethnic Frontier Theory 
4.1 FRONTIERS AS INCUBATORS OF GROUP SOLIDARITY 
Chapter 3 argued that the capacity for collective action, or asabiya, to use lbn 
Khaldun inspired tenninology, is an important variable that affects the ability 
of polities to defend and expand territory. Large territorial polities-empirestypically have a complex internal structure, and therefore polity-level solidarity 
