
Finally, there is the issue of what the theories and results discussed in the 
book mean for modernity. Generally, I tried very hard not to cross the selfimposed temporal limit of 1900, for reasons explained in Section 1.2.2. It was not, 
however, my intention to imply that the insights from models and data for agrarian 
societies are completely irrelevant to modem societies. Clearly, we cannot directly 
apply some models, for example, those in Chapter 7, to western industrialized 
states because population growth in these societies does not lead to starvation. On 
the other hand, some of the ideas developed for the dynamics of elites in agrarian 
states may yield fruitful hypotheses about modem polities (see, for example, the 
discussion in Goldstone 2002). For example, modem societies may be susceptible 
to elite overproduction. A recent article in the Economist (November 14, 2002) 
reported that the proportion of Britons between 18 and 21 years old going to 
college has more than doubled during the 1990s (from 15 to 33%). Is British 
society approaching a crisis? This is the kind of hypothesis that can be addressed 
in future research.

Other theories may also be of relevance to current affairs. Judging by the burgeoning literature on social capital, the ability of groups and whole societies for 
concerted and effective action is of great interest to sociologists and political 
scientists. Geopolitical arguments were used to successfully predict the demise 
of the Soviet Union (Collins 1995). And the dynamics of assimilation or, conversely, ethnic fissioning and mobilization are the key elements of current international politics (Moynihan 1993). All these directions are extremely interesting 
and should eventually be followed. Still, I continue to argue for a conservative 
approach of first honing the theories and analytical approaches on the historical 
material, and applying them to contemporary issues only once we are reasonably 
sure of how well our approaches work.

10.4 TOWARD THEORETICAL CLIODYNAMICS? 
If the combined modelinglempirical approach to investigating history, advocated 
in this book, has the potential to become a fruitful research program, then it 
would be a good idea to come up with a better name for it than "historical dynamics." I propose to call it cliodynamics, by analogy with cliometrics. The term 
cliometrics was originally used for the new economic history in a rather derogatory sense (Williamson 1991 ), but now cliometrics is an accepted and mature 
direction within history. If we understand cliometrics in the general sense (that 
is, a focus on any quantitative data in history, not just economic ones), then it 
is an extremely valuable complementary discipline to the historical dynamics research program. Cliodynamics needs cliometrics for the raw empirical inputs. But 
I would argue that cliometrics needs something like cliodynamics as a source of 
theories and hypotheses to guide the empirical research.

