disruption, demographic contraction, and cultural despair. This general crisis relieves the pressures, so the economic trends run in reverse. Demand falls, prices 
deflate, and real wages begin to rise (because labor has become scarce). After 
some lag time, a period of new equilibrium develops, and the cultural mood 
becomes positive. Population starts to increase, and the cycle begins again.

Fischer collected together an enormous amount of cliometric material: changes 
in population; prices of food, oxen, and manufactures; import rates of precious 
metals; real wages, rents, and interest rates; and even crime, bastardy, and alcohol 
consumption rates. Using this array of quantitative data he then traced out the 
main stages (price revolution, crisis, and equilibrium) of each of the four great 
waves that, according to his analysis, occurred in western Europe during the last 
millennium.

The responses to Fischer's book were largely negative (e.g., Krugman 1997; 
de Vries 1998; Morgan 1999; Munro 1999). Reviewers criticized Fischer's caricaturization of the conventional theories of inflation, a lack of mathematically 
convincing models, and his failure to make a distinction between pre- and postindustrial revolution societies. These criticisms are fair. Yet, I think the majority of 
reviewers would also agree that Fischer managed to identify a very important and 
broad pattern of European history during the last millennium. (In the Appendix, 
Fischer briefly points out some similar-looking patterns in the ancient world and 
East Asia.) 
Furthermore, Fischer's account and explanatory model are broadly consistent 
with the demographic-structural theory. Thus, the Goldstonian waves of early 
modern state breakdowns (during the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries) correspond to the crisis periods of the Fischerian second and third waves. Also, 
note that the duration of the three complete waves (3, 3, and 2 centuries, respectively) matches the theoretical predictions of the demographic-fiscal model 
of Section 7 .2.1. Thus, I would argue that the models developed in this chapter may address at least one shortcoming of Fischer's book, its lack of explicit 
mathematical theory.

7 .3.3 After the Black Death 
The sudden arrival of the plague pandemic (the Black Death) in the midfourteenth century resulted in a massive perturbation of social, economic, and 
political structures of western Afroeurasian societies. The primary impact of 
the plague was the removal of one-third to one-half of the population in many 
communities. Therefore, we can view this perturbation as a "natural experiment" 
with which to test various theories using population numbers as an important 
explanatory variable. What is interesting is that different societies followed 
divergent social trajectories after the impact of the Black Death. The explanation 
of how the subsequent trajectory depended on the structural characteristics of 
the society becomes an important goal for comparative historical research. Many 
of the issues discussed during the Brenner debate {Aston and Philpin 1985) were 
closely related to this question.

A recent Ph.D. thesis by Stuart Borsch (2001) develops a particularly 
interesting comparison between post-plague Egypt and England. Both regions 
lost roughly half of their population, with the initial Black Death and subsequent 
plague outbreaks combined. In England wages rose, rents and grain prices 
dropped, unemployment decreased, per capita incomes rose, and the economy 
fully revived by the year 1500. In contrast, the consequences of depopulation 
in Egypt were profoundly different. Wages dropped, land rents and grain prices 
rose, aitd unemployment levels increased. No economic recovery was anywhere 
in sight by 1500: agricultural output had declined between 1350 and 1500 
by 68%. Thus, one society, England, responded to depopulation in a typical 
Malthusian-Ricardian manner {however, this response still took more than a 
century; more on this below), while the other, Egypt, responded in a completely 
opposite way.

Borsch considers several alternative explanations of these divergent outcomes 
and focuses on the differences in the landholding systems as the main explanatory 
factor. From 1250 to 1517 Egypt was ruled by a group of specialized warriors 
known as Mamluks. Mamluks were "slave-soldiers," Christian or pagan children 
purchased via Italian intermediaries from the Caucasus. The Mamluk landholding 
system was very different from the forms it took in western Europe. Rather 
than forming a loose group of individual landholders closely associated with 
their estates and the local village communities, Mamluk landholders formed a 
unified body that would often act together to support their interests in the rural 
scene. In the postplague period Mamluks used their tremendous collective power 
in an attempt to maintain the same level of resource extraction from a greatly 
diminished rural population, resulting in a much higher level of exploitation of 
individual peasants (this is very similar to the dynamics predicted by the selfish 
elite model).

In England the elites also attempted to follow this route. The intense exploitation of peasants was one of the main reasons for the repeated peasant uprisings of 
the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. Yet, as Borsch argues, the struggle between lord and peasant was won not on the battlefield (peasant mobs never 
had a chance against the heavily armed knights as long as the latter were acting 
in a cohesive manner), but by peasants voting en masse with their feet. Peasants 
were willing to abandon the estates if rent or wage conditions were not to their 
advantage. Eventually, the landlord attempt at collective action broke down and 
the peasants' demands were slowly but surely met. As rents dropped, rural wages 
rose, and customary fees and fines were abolished, peasant incomes rose, and the 
conditions were set for another period of sustained economic and demographic 
growth.

Potential critics of the Borsch argument may object by pointing to many other 
divergent aspects of the Egyptian and English societies. To this criticism, Borsch 
has an excellent response: another comparison, but this time to the situation in 
Egypt after the Antonine plagues of the late second century. Depopulation was 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 147 
severe, eliminating one-third of the tax-paying population. However, the landholding system of Roman Egypt was more similar to that of medieval England than 
to that of Mamluk Egypt. As a result Roman Egypt recovered relatively quickly 
from the devastation caused by the plagues, and in general its social trajectory 
was similar to that of post-Black Death England.

Assessment 
I think that the argument constructed and defended by Borsch is very persuasive.

This research is also an excellent example of the strength of the comparative 
approach in historical sociology. To the case studies of the divergent post-Black 
Death trajectories in western Europe (England and France) versus central Europe 
(Prussia, Poland, and Bohemia), discussed during the Brenner debate, Borsch 
adds two more "data points": Egypt after the Black Death and after the Antonine 
plagues. It is to be hoped that eventually we will have dozens of such data points 
with which to do statistics. A formal statistical meta-analysis will go a long way 
