By the eleventh century, NFR (with the exception of Brittany) appears to have 
been ruled by what was, despite its disparate origins as Roman-era landowners, 
Frankish counts, or descendants of Vikings, a fairly homogeneous elite, at least 
if we focus on linguistic and religious characteristics. However, the region was 
not politically unified. Instead, multiple foci of territorial power simultaneously 
formed and consolidated, starting in the middle of the ninth century, when the 
Neustrian march was created by Charles the Bald, and intensifying in the late 
tenth century (Dunbabin 1985; Bates 1995). The most dynamic polities were 
organized around the Dukes of Normandy and the Counts of Anjou and Paris 
(the latter secured for himself the French Crown in 987, although at the time 
it was largely of symbolic value). Other, less aggressive incipient polities were 
organized by the Counts of Blois (who acquired Champaign) and the Dukes 
of Bretagne. This intense episode of polity building is very reminiscent of the 
dynamics of the spatial frontier model. If this analogy is valid, then the conquest of England by the Normans in late eleventh century can be interpreted as 
an example of the reflux effect. In fact, the dynamics of England for the next 
three centuries should probably be interpreted as an offshoot of NFR. As is well 
known, after the Norman conquest, the native English elites were "destroyed as 
a class," and replaced with members of Duke William's host, who mostly originated from northern France and the Low Countries. There was another infusion 
of north French when England passed to the Angevin dynasty of Plantagenets in 
the mid-twelfth century. The process of mutual assimilation of French-speaking 
elites and English-speaking lower strata took no less than the following two centuries, and can probably be thought complete only after the Plantagenet-Tudor 
transition.

A Digression on the Role of Nonelite Asabiya 
A contrast between the ultimate fate of Norman England and a polity having similar origins, Norman Sicily, is instructive. Both were created at approximately the 
same time and had a similar initial sociopolitical trajectory. Thus, both polities 
were cited as examples of precocious state building in twelfth-century Europe.

Both were unusually centralized for their times and had solid fiscal bases. The 
trajectories of these two states, however, radically diverged after the twelfth century. The Kingdom of Sicily (which occupied the whole SIT region) rapidly 
declined, and went through a sequence of owners: German Emperors, Angevins, 
Aragonese, Castilians, and finally Piedmontese. In short it was an object rather 
than a subject of international politics. By contrast, England, following a period 
of relative insignificance after its expulsion from the continent in the mid-fifteenth 
century, eventually achieved the status of a Great Power, and even a hegemonic 
one during parts of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. This comparison, limited as it is to a single pair of data points, suggests the importance of the asabiya 
of the lower stratum of the society. SIT was an imperial core for at least half 
a millennium after the Roman frontiers moved away in the first century B.C.E.

The theory suggests that this region should have a thoroughly depressed asabiya.

By contrast, SBR was the locus of an intense frontier from the fifth through the 
eleventh centuries. It is clear that on the eve of the Norman conquest the English 
were already well on the way to building a coherent and aggressively expanding 
state. This observation leads to the hypothesis that while a polity's dynamics in 
the short run may depend more on the asabiya of its elites, the long-term success 
or failure must depend very much on the asabiya of the general populace. At this 
point, this proposition is just a hypothesis, but it is clear that we can construct 
~ 0 
c: 
~ 
.= 
...

Q) 
:;::l 
c: 
e 
1.1.

CASE STUDIES 175 
a test by considering the universe of polities, where there was a significant ethnic difference between the elites and general population, and examining how the 
estimated asabiya of the population affected the durability of the polity.

Dynamics of Frontier Intensity in NFR and Size of the French Polity 
In Figure 9.1 I plot the frontier intensity in NFR and the territorial extent of the 
French polity. The curve starts in 987 c.E., when Hugo Capet was elected King 
of France. Around 1000 c.E., the Capetians controlled a small area of northern 
France around Paris and Orleans. Initial expansion was slow, and by 1200 c.E. the 
royal domain was still less than 0.1 Mm2 in size. For comparison, the Angevin 
domain at that time encompassed 0.4 Mm2• Then, during the first half of the 
thirteenth century the territory expanded rapidly to over 0.3 Mm2, and stabilized 
at that level. Most of this growth spurt occurred at the expense of the Angevins, 
and as a result of Albigensian Crusades. Thereafter, growth continued to 1900 
c.E., but with some oscillations that will be discussed in the next section.

What is striking about this trajectory is how slow-long term-the processes 
are. NFR was affected by frontier conditions for around eight centuries. After 
the tenth century, the frontier rapidly declined and then disappeared. Yet the 
first substantial spurt of growth occurred only during the thirteenth century. The 
French polity continued to expand for another six centuries and began showing signs of declining asabiya only recently (the string of military defeats from 
Germany in 1870, 1914, and 1940; loss of the overseas empire). These observations suggest that the temporal scale on which asabiya waxes and wanes is very 
long. In fact, the dynamics of asabiya appear to be substantially slower than the 
0.6 
9 
0.4 
6 
0.2 
3 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 
Century C.E.

Figure 9.1 Frontier intensity in NFR and the area of French polity (excluding overseas 
possessions).

"' E 
:::!: 
cU 
e 
< 
