80 )( 
Q) 
"'C 
.E 60 r:::: 
0 
:;:I 
a.

cu 
40 ::I 
8 
0 
20 
0 
-1 0 2 3 4 5 
Century C.E.

Figure 8.4 Relative proportion of excavated settlements occupied during each period in 
seven western areas of Roman Empire (Britain, Belgica, Northern and Southern Gaul, 
Italy, and Northern and Southern Spain). (Data from Lewit 1991) 
SECUlAR CYCLES IN POPUlATION NUMBERS 
60~~r============~~----------~ 
~ 40 en 
::1 
0 
J: 
~ z 20 
6 7 8 
ACF 
9 10 11 12 13 
Century C.E.

163 
Figure 8.5 New houses built on Wetherill Mesa. ACF: the autocorrelation function of the 
square-root transformed data (lag units in centuries).

Another example of site occupancy data, this time from the New World, 
was published by Hally ( 1996) for platform mounds in Georgia during 1000-
1600 c.E., suggesting three oscillations in the northwestern part of the area, but 
only two oscillations in the southeast. Lack of space prevents me from providing 
more examples of this kind. However, one last data set (Varien 1999), also from 
the New World, needs to be mentioned because of its uniquely fine temporal 
resolution. The data come from Mesa Verde (Colorado) where, as a result of the 
dry climate, logs used in house construction can be preserved for centuries (and, 
incidentally, used over and over in building houses). Using dendrochronological methods, archaeologists can precisely date the time when the logs were cut.

The distribution of times when logs found at one site, Wetherill Mesa, were cut 
is shown in Figure 8.5. These data show that there were four spurts of housebuilding activity on Wetherill Mesa, occurring during the seventh, ninth, eleventh, 
and thirteenth centuries, suggesting that these centuries were periods of rapid population growth. Following periods of building activity were typically periods of 
no building at all (around the years 700, 900, and after 1300; only during the 
twelfth-century did low levels of building activity persist between the eleventhand thirteenth-century peaks). Unfortunately, we cannot analyze these data using 
the standard NLTSM approach, because the structure of the process generating 
them is very different from regular population processes (in effect, we have some 
information on what happens during the population increase periods, but data on 
population declines are completely censored from the data set). However, we can 
calculate the ACF, after transforming the data, to ameliorate the skewness (see 
the inset in Figure 8.5). The ACF clearly reveals a two-century cycle in the data.

8.4 POPULATION DYNAMICS AND POLmCAL INSTABILITY 
While the finding of secular oscillations in human population data is in basic 
agreement with the demographic-structural model, it is possible that other sociodemographic processes could produce the same empirical pattern. It would be 
much more satisfying to test the predictions of the demographic-structural theory 
directly, by examining whether the relationship between population fluctuations 
and political instability in the historical record conforms to the pattern predicted 
by theory. One very interesting paper that addresses this issue is that of Cyrus 
Chu and Ronald Lee (1994), which I already discussed in the context of models 
of the dynastic cycle in China. These authors analyzed the population time series 
for China developed by Chao and Hsieh (1988) and two dummy variables for 
peasant rebellion and incidence of war. The dummy variables take the value 1 if 
rebellion (or war) is present, otherwise they are set to 0. An additional predictor 
variable used by Chu and Lee was the temperature time series.

Chu and Lee fitted a series of models to the data, starting with simpler ones and 
then increasing the number of explanatory variables. They found that the model 
that included the effect of temperature and warfare, but not peasant rebellions, 
explained a small proportion of the variance in the population data (R2 = 0.021).

By contrast, the R2 of the model that also included rebellions was about five times 
as high, 0.116. The coefficient characterizing the effect of rebellion on population 
change was highly significant. There was also a statistically significant effect of 
population density on the incidence of rebellion .• 
One of the reasons for a small R2 characterizing the effect of rebellion on 
population change is the nature of the data used by Chu and Lee. Because they 
only had a dummy characterization of revolt, they did not know the scale of the 
uprising, and consequently their analysis did not distinguish between small and 
large uprisings (Chu and Lee 1994:367). Apparently, Chu and Lee were not aware 
of the data set on the incidence of internal war in China constructed by J. S. Lee 
(1931). This index gives us a graduated scale for measuring political instability 
in China. Plotting the population and internal war data on the same graph, we 
observe that there appears to be some sort of dynamic relationship (Figure 8.6; 
focusing on the relatively stationary period from 200 B.C.E. to 1070 C.E.).

To formally investigate the interactive effects of population dynamics and political instability on each other, I used an extension of the nonlinear time-series 
analysis of the Chinese data in Section 8.3.1. We found there that the process 
order of Chinese population dynamics, when measured on the generational time 
scale, was definitely 2 (or higher). I now would like to test the hypothesis that 
political instability is the endogenous variable that drives the second-order oscillations. If this hypothesis is correct, then we should detect a strong influence of 
political instability on the per capita rate of population change.

I fitted a series of models to the per capita rate of population change, defined 
