them. Under conditions of civilized life, however, asabiya inevitably declines. In 
approximately four generations, asabiya becomes so low that the state collapses 
as a result of factional conflict. This is the point at which the civilized area 
becomes vulnerable to another conquest by desert tribes.

Assessment 
There is much in lbn Khaldun's theory that appears to be very useful to our 
objectives. First, the theory is very clearly formulated. Thus, it makes clearcut 
empirical predictions that can be tested. Additionally, if quantitative predictions 
are needed, then the theory can, rather easily, be translated into a mathematical 
model. Second, Ibn Khaldun describes explicit sociological mechanisms on which 
his theory of state collapse is based. This provides another way in which the 
theory can be tested.

There are also some weak points. In general, while lbn Khaldun offered a brilliant account of one kind of society-an Islamic society of the arid zone--his 
account is not universally applicable even within Islam (Gellner 1981:88-89). It 
would be interesting to see if his theory can be extended to agrarian societies 
in general. More specifically, one could question lbn Khaldun's emphasis on the 
importance of "luxury" in asabiya decline. lbn Khaldun's is not the only theory 
that invokes this mechanism; many "softening-of-the-fiber" theories propose similar explanations. This is a question that should be resolved empirically, but to 
do that we need some explicit alternatives to test against. I try to construct an 
alternative explanation in Chapter 4.

3.2.2 Gumilev's Theory 
Although the ethnogenetic theory of Gumilev {1971) is largely unknown in the 
West, it has generated a considerable controversy in Russia, at least among the 
lay public interested in macrohistorical questions. The reception among professional historians and ethnologists was cooler, for reasons that will become apparent shortly. Despite its serious scientific flaws, however, Gumilev's theory contains several interesting concepts, which can be of use to the historical dynamics 
project, and thus I briefly review it here.

The main kernel of Gumilev's theory is the explicit connection that he makes 
between ethnie and polity dynamics. According to Gumilev, each polity has its 
core ethnie, and it is the properties of core ethnies that drive the success or failure 
COLLECTIVE SOLIDARI1Y 41 
of their polities. The key concept of Gumilev's theory is passionarity. Individuals 
with high passionarity (passionaries) purse, with great energy, some goal that is 
usually extrarational. That is, passionaries are typically motivated not by personal 
gain, but by some higher goal (the goal may be selected either consciously or 
not). Although in his definition Gumilev does not directly address the collective 
solidarity aspect of passionarity, the language he uses in his examples is very 
evocative of asabiya. In particular, Gumilev repeatedly mentions the ability of 
passionaries to sacrifice themselves for the sake of the collective good. (This 
exposes one of the problems with Gumilev's theory: it is not developed very 
precisely. Instead, Gumilev relies on voluminous examples and evocative prose 
to get his point across.) 
Different ethnies have variable proportions of passionaries. Additionally, the 
degree of passionarity of an ethnie changes with time. An ethnie with great numbers of passionaries will expand at the expense of other ethnies, in the process 
building an empire. Thus, high passionarity directly translates into a polity's capacity for territorial expansion, and vice versa.

The second key concept for Gumilev is ethnogenesis. He defines it as the 
process by which some or many members of an ethnie become passionaries. Unfortunately, the specifics of the mechanism that he offers rely on phenomena that 
are either currently unknown to science or flatly contradicted by it. According 
to Gumilev, the Earth is periodically struck by bundles of cosmic energy, which 
cause the mutation of passionarity. Gumilev identified a number (about ten) of 
such events that occurred during the known history of Eurasia. Each event gives 
impulse to multiple occurrences of ethnogenesis in bandlike regions several hundreds of kilometers long.

After the initial impulse, the passionarity of the affected group increases over 
the period of several centuries, reaches a peak, and then declines. Meanwhile, the 
group expands, first becoming a subethnie, then a full ethnie (in the process perhaps absorbing other ethnically related groups), and finally creating a metaethnic 
empire (unless it prematurely loses to an even stronger neighbor). Eventually, as 
passionarity continues to fade, the polity built around the core ethnie loses its 
cohesiveness and falls prey to a combination of internal warfare and external aggression. Using multiple examples, ranging across the whole history of Eurasia, 
Gumilev provides a detailed phenomenology of the rise and fall of ethnies and 
empires.

Assessment 
Because I focused on what I perceive as major weaknesses in Gumilev's theory, 
my account did not really do justice to it. Gumilev has amassed an enormous 
amount of historical and ethnological material. Even when one disagrees with 
the mechanisms that he advances, it is difficult to escape the feeling that he has 
indeed identified some regularities in the historical process. I believe that there 
are several insights of Gumilev's that are of great interest. First, it is a fruitful 
hypothesis that there is a close connection between the fortunes of a polity and 
its core ethnie. This is a particularly important point, because Gumilev shows 
with much factual material that the modern relationship between nationalism and 
state has very close analogs in history. That is, ethnicity and polity are variables 
that may be dynamically connected.

Second, Gumilev's concept of ethnogenesis has a lot of merit. Most if not 
all currently existing ethnies started small and then expanded by a variety of 
mechanisms, including demographic growth and ethnic assimilation. Successful 
territorial expansion was very much a factor in this ethnic expansion. Something 
allowed these initially small ethnic groups to acquire a high capacity for collective 
action. Thus, another potentially fruitful hypothesis is that there is a close relation 
between the process of ethnogenesis and enhanced collective solidarity.

In contrast, Gumilev's concept of passionarity does not appear to be a fruitful concept to me; at least it does not add anything useful to Ibn Khaldun's 
asabiya. Furthermore, the temporal trajectory of passionarity increase followed 
by decrease, postulated by Gumilev, is too mechanical. Gumilev treats passionarity as an exogenous variable: it waxes and wanes according to its own internal 
nature, so to speak, and is not related in any obvious way to other variables in 
the system. Before this concept can be of use, it must be endogenized somehow.

Interestingly, the few mathematical attempts to model Gumilev's theory that I 
know of specify passionarity as an exogenously driven variable.

3.2.3 The Modern Context 
Durkheim 's Mechanical and Organic Solidarity 
The concept of asabiya (collective solidarity) that I discuss in this chapter does not 
"hang in the air." Instead, it appears to be related to several much more modem 
theories in sociology, social psychology, and political science. Within sociology 
