period of stability was the reigns of Vladimir Monomakh and two of his sons 
(1113-1139}. The second period of civil war in the mid-twelfth century led to the 
final collapse of the Kievan state. In 1169 Andrei Bogoliubskii sacked Kiev and 
transferred the capital to Vladimir in northeastern Rus. Kiev was sacked again 
in 1203 and suffered complete destruction in 1240 at the hands of the Mongols 
(Riazanovsky 2000).

The Golden Horde Intercycle 
By the year 1200 the core of the Kievan state had undergone a complete disintegration. The southern half of Kievan Rus was the arena for a three-way struggle 
between branches of Ryurik's clan: the Rostislavichi of Smolensk, the Olgovichi 
of Chernigov, and Roman Mstislavich of Volynia (Fennell 1983). Two relatively 
stable polities, Novgorod and Vladimir, were preeminent in the north. The spatial pattern of an imploded core, surrounded by rising marcher states, is a typical feature of the postimperiallandscape (Chapter 4). The endogenous evolution 
of Kievan Rus, however, was forcibly interrupted by an intrusion from central 
Asia. For about two hundred years, from the mid-thirteenth to the mid-fifteenth 
century, Rus (and especially its northeastern part) became the periphery of the 
Mongolian Empire (or the Golden Horde, after the empire was divided among 
the descendants of Chinggis Khan). As a result of this change of status, the political dynamics of northeastern Rus, or central Russia (CRU), as I will refer to 
it from now on, were determined by exogenous forces, originating from an imperial steppe confederation. For this reason, I refer to these two hundred years 
as an "intercycle" period. I should note, however, that recently Sergey Nefedov 
(2002b) persuasively argued that the Mongolian period can be considered as a 
complete secular cycle in its own right, especially in the Novgorodian land, where 
the Mongolian influence was weak.

The demographic-structural models of Chapter 7 suggest that agrarian states 
with monogamous elites tend to have longer secular cycles compared to nomadic 
confederations with polygamous elites. Because central Russia became a periphery of a steppe polity, it was affected by a distinctly different "rhythm of history," 
than what was typical either before or after the period of Mongol domination.

The following summary of events on the Eurasian steppe and environs is from 
Grousset (1970).

The huge territory conquered by the Mongols during the first half of the thirteenth century contained four large "cultural areas" inhabited by settled people: 
China, Transoxania, Persia (including Mesopotamia), and eastern Europe. From 
the middle of the thirteenth century, these four areas were ruled by four separate Chinggisid dynasties: (1) Kublai and his successors (the Yuan dynasty) in 
China; (2) Jagataids in Turkestan (which included Transoxania); (3) Hulagu and 
his successors (Il-Khans) in Persia; and (4) Juchids (Batu and his successors) 
in the Kipchak Steppe (the Golden Horde). According to the theory advanced 
in Chapter 7, these four polities should be subject to the lbn Khaldun cycles of 
around a century in period. This is indeed what happened.

In China, the civil war between the successors of Kublai broke out in 1328.

The 1350s saw numerous revolts led by native leaders, and in 1368 one of these 
leaders expelled the Mongols and established the Ming dynasty.

Turkestan was unified until 1333-1334, when a nomad-led insurrection broke 
out against the Jagataid regime in eastern Turkestan. By 1350 the power in Transoxania passed into the hands of local Turkic nobles. After a period of turmoil, 
CASE STUDIES 193 
a new dynasty was established by Timur. Timur unified Transoxania in 1379 
and conquered Iran during the 1390s. The Timurid dynasty also lasted about a 
century. In 1469 Persia was lost to the White Sheep Horde, while Transoxania 
splintered between warring branches of Timur's descendants.

The Persia of 11-Khans underwent dissolution in 1335. After a period of civil 
war it was conquered by Timur (see above). When the Timurids lost Persia in 
1469, another turbulent period followed, and eventually, by 1500, Persia was 
unified by a native dynasty (Safavids).

A similar course of events occurred in the Kipchak Steppe. The Juchids' rule 
ended in 1359, when the Kipchak Steppe fell into anarchy. After a period of civil 
war, the Golden Horde underwent a revival under Timur Qutlugh, who expelled 
Tokhtamysh in 1391 (with Timur's help). In 1399 Timur Qutlugh won a signal 
victory over the Lithuanians and consolidated his dominion over Russia, although 
a series of punitive expeditions were required during the early fifteenth century 
to keep the tribute flowing. In the middle of the fifteenth century, however, the 
revived Golden Horde began disintegrating again. The first piece to secede was 
the Crimean Khanate in 1430. The Khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan followed 
(in 1445 and 1466, respectively).

The Moscow polity went through its own period of civil war during the second 
quarter of the fifteenth century, which, curiously, coincided with the civil war 
on the steppe that lead to the final splintering of the Golden Horde. As soon 
as the civil war ended, Muscovy became de facto an independent state (de jure 
independence had to wait until 1480).

To summarize, all Chinggisid dynasties went through typical lbn Khaldun cycles of about a century in period. In China, a native dynasty expelled the Mongols 
after one cycle, while in Russia and Iran the steppe dynasties went through two 
cycles before giving way to native rulers. Incidentally, the central Eurasian steppes 
continued to undergo lbn Khaldun cycles, until their conquest and division between the Russian and the Chinese empires.

The Muscovy Wave 
After the end of the succession wars in 1450, Muscovy embarked on a centurylong period of practically uninterrupted expansion. By the early sixteenth century 
the "gathering of Russian lands" resulted in the Muscovite state's absorption of 
virtually all the lands of Kievan Rus that were not part of Lithuania. During 
the 1550s Russia conquered Kazan. Once the barrier of this moderately strong 
state was removed, the Khanates of Astrakhan and Siberia quickly fell, and rapid 
eastward expansion into the stateless territory of north Asia became possible (this 
is an example of the "breakthrough effect," discussed in Section 4.2.2).

By the 1570s, however, the Muscovite expansion ran out of steam. The prolonged Livonian war (1558-1583) actually resulted in a loss of territory. Historians have proposed many explanations of Russia's defeat by Poland-Lithuania and 
Swt:den, but I suggest that the root cause was the inversion of the secular trend.

Indeed, evidence supports a demographic-structural interpretation of the 
sixteenth-century crisis of the Muscovite state that culminated in the Time of 
Troubles (1598-1613) (Dunning 1998). The population of Russia grew rapidly, 
possibly doubling, during the sixteenth century, with most increase occurring 
during the first half of the century. The numbers of the aristocracy (members of 
the Boyar Duma) and the lower class of service nobility increased even faster 
than the general population. The price of grain increased by a factor of 4-5, 
while for many Russians taxes rose sevenfold (adjusted for inflation). During 
