case of Christianity, where R2 is the proportion predicted). The units of r are yr- 1• 
Case study f R2 
Islam (Iran) 0.028 0.9998 
Islam (Spain) 0.015 0.997 
Christianity 0.034 0.74 
Mormon 0.023 0.989 
messy or impossible to predict. Furthermore, a clean test of alternative models is 
possible. Recollect that we started with three models that were based on different 
assumptions of how people are converted to a new religion: the noninteractive, the 
autocatalytic, and the threshold processes. The quantitative tests of all four data 
sets yield a unanimous result: the autocatalytic model fits the data far better than 
the two alternatives. This is a heartening conclusion, because according to the 
current sociological thinking, conversion travels through interpersonal networks 
(Stark 1996}, the mechanism on which the autocatalytic model is based. In other 
words, a purely data-driven analysis agrees with the theoretical postulates.

If we start dissecting some of the better measured data (e.g., the two cases of 
conversion to Islam}, then we find some systematic deviations between model predictions and data. But this caveat in no way diminishes the accomplishment of the 
autocatalytic model: it does much better relative to alternatives, and progress in 
science is achieved by successive improvement of theories, by discarding poorly 
performing alternatives in favor of those that do better. (Actually, in this case, the 
autocatalytic model does extremely well even in absolute terms, but that is beside 
the point.) Furthermore, the observed systematic deviations suggest an improved 
model-initial immigration followed by autocatalytic conversion process-which 
makes a lot of sense in light of what we know about the history of early Islamic 
Iran and Spain.

The empirical finding that the autocatalytic process describes the observed 
conversion dynamics best has important implications for the historical dynamics 
research program. Logistic growth (unlike, for example, asymptotic growth} has 
a certain sensitivity to initial conditions built in it. Consider, for example, the 
growth of Christianity. Let us quantify the temporal scale of conversion by time 
needed to reach the inflection point on the logistic curve (when 50% of population is converted). Starting with 1000 Christians in 40 c.E. and using Stark's 
estimate f = 0.034, the midpoint is reached in 368 C.E. (this is a bit later than 
Stark's calculation, because Stark used the pure exponential method, while I am 
employing the logistic model). To contrast the logistic growth with the asymptotic 
growth, let us assume that the parameter p = 0.0021, because with this parameter an asymptotic process starting with 1000 converts in 40 c.E. also hits the 
midpoint by 368 c.E. The trajectory predicted by the asymptotic model is very 
insensitive to the initial conditions, how many Christians there were in 40 c.E.

(Table 6.2). Whether there are 10 or 100,000 Christians in 40 c.E., the midpoint 
is still achieved in 368 or 367 c.E. By contrast, every tenfold change in the initial 
condition changes the logistically predicted midpoint by 69 years (Table 6.2).

Sensitivity to initial conditions makes prediction problematic, especially when 
initial conditions are hard to measure precisely. In the Christianity case, Stark's 
estimate of 1000 converts at 40 c.E. could easily be revised by an order of magnitude up or down. Furthermore, the tendency of a nonlinear dynamical system 
to amplify small variations in initial conditions may cause it to behave chaotically. It is known that, for example, resource-consumer models in which resource 
grows asymptotically are much more stable than the analogous models in which 
the resource grows logistically (Turchin 2003). I have already commented on 
ETHNOKINETICS 115 
Table 6.2 Predictions of logistic versus noninteractive models on when 50% of population 
is converted, depending on the initial condition.

C(O) Noninteractive Logistic 
10 368 C.E. 506 C.E.

lOO 368 C.E. 437 C.E.

1000 368 C.E. 368 C.E.

10,000 368 C.E. 299 C.E.

100,000 367 C.E. 230 C.E.

the role of logistic growth in the chaotic dynamics of the spatial frontier model 
(Section 4.2.1).

Finally, in empirical tests I focused on religious conversion, because that is 
where I could find data. However, religion is just one source of markers for 
symbolic boundaries between ethnies. The nature of the demarcation markers 
affects the ease with which they can be crossed. Crossing some boundaries is 
easy (for example, acquiring appropriate dress), while others are much more 
difficult or even impossible to cross. For example, if race is one of the defining 
ethnic characteristics, as in modem Japan, then a European has no chance of 
being accepted. Language-based boundaries are also difficult for individuals to 
cross, since the great majority of people, once past puberty, are unable to learn a 
different language well enough to pass as a native speaker. Furthermore, linguistic 
assimilation usually does not happen directly from one language to another, but 
indirectly through a distinct class of bilingual speakers. Thus, ethnic assimilation 
that involves crossing a linguistic boundary could be even slower than religious 
conversion. Note that even religious conversion is a surprisingly slow process: in 
the empirical case studies, reaching the half point of conversion typically required 
2-3 centuries.

In the models I considered there were only two classes of individuals: assimilated and not assimilated. Creating extra classes is one way to make models more 
realistic. For example, linguistic assimilation should probably be modeled by explicitly adding a third variable, the proportion of individuals in the polity who 
are bilingual speakers. Furthermore, creating multiple classes may be a reasonable 
approach to modeling the situation when an ethnic boundary involves multiple 
symbolic dimensions. For example, if assimilation requires both converting to 
the official religion and learning the language of the core ethnie, we might set 
up four classes, reflecting all possible combinations of the two religions and two 
languages. More classes, in principle, could be added to reflect finer divisions, but 
eventually the model will become so complex as to be unmanageable. An alternative approach is to postulate that there are many continuous dimensions along 
which two ethnies may differ. Thus, each ethnie is a point in this multidimensional space, or even a cloud of points, if we wish to explicitly model intraethnic 
variability in individual characteristics. The critical variable, then, becomes the 
distance separating two ethnies in this multidimensional space. A somewhat similar approach has been used by the creators of the Sugarscape model (Epstein and 
Axtell 1996), although they modeled cultural traits discretely, as sequences of ls 
("trait present") and Os ("trait absent").

