geography of eastern Europe. Nevertheless, this frontier swayed back and forth 
as time progressed. During the Kievan Russia period, the frontier was pushed 
south and east. After the Mongolian invasion, the frontier was pushed far back 
north. Finally, the frontier again advanced south during the Muscovite period, 
and finally was closed down by the Russian Empire in the late eighteenth century 
(with the conquest of the Crimean Khanate).

The third class of frontiers includes several "leftovers" from the Roman frontiers. The frontier between Germanic invaders and the indigenous people of Roman Britain is one example. This frontier lost its intensity by the end of the 
seventh century, with Anglo-Saxon conversion to Christianity. It then regained 
intensity after the invasion by another set of Germanic pagans, these ones from 
Scandinavia.

At the other end of Europe, the frontiers of the Byzantine Empire are another example of a "Roman leftover." The Balkan frontier lost its intensity by 
the tenth century, when invading Slavs and Bulgars had been largely converted to 
Christianity. The eastern frontier, however, remained a major fault line throughout the period. In the seventh century, Byzantium lost its Middle Eastern and 
African possessions to the Caliphate. As a result, Anatolia became one of the 
most intense interfaces between Christianity and Islam. The Arab expansion put 
an enormous amount of pressure on Byzantium. The Byzantines survived and 
two centuries later began their own advance. Unfortunately, the Byzantine Empire experienced a disastrous reverse at the battle of Manzikert in the late eleventh 
century, and the advance turned into retreat. In the fourteenth century, the advancing Ottomans reached the Balkans, and eventually as far west as the Hungarian 
plains. Thus, the Ottoman frontier connected and coincided with the Great Steppe 
frontier, especially if we take into account that the Crimean Khanate was an Ottoman dependency throughout most of its existence. Incidentally, the Anatolian 
Plateau can be considered as another extension of the Great Eurasian Steppe 
frontier.

This is a very schematic sketch of the frontier history of Europe, which focuses only on intense and long-lived metaethnic fault lines. There were many 
other population movements (Gaelic Scotti into Scotland, Basques into Aquitaine, 
Muslims into Southern Italy and especially Sicily, Vlachs into Moldavia, Greeks 
from Egypt and Syria into Byzantium after the Muslim conquest, and later to 
Greece, etc.) but according to my calculations these occurrences were either too 
local or did not result in an intense and prolonged frontier (see the Appendix for 
details).

To construct a test of the frontier model, I classified all fifty regions as "frontier" if during 500-1500 c.E. they had a frontier satisfying my intensity and length 
requirements (five or higher intensity and three or more centuries). Otherwise, the 
region was classified as "no frontier." I then identified all large polities (achieving 
an area of at least 0.1 Mm2 at some point in time) that occurred in Europe (including Asia Minor) during the period of 1000-1900 c.E. I then eliminated some 
polities so that I would have at most one per cultural region, retaining the one 
that achieved the greater peak area. For example, the region KAZ was the locus 
of two polities (Volga Bulgars and the Kazan Khanate ). I eliminated the Kazan 
Khanate and retained the Volga Bulgars, since the latter controlled a greater area 
at its peak. I also eliminated two polities that were of clear exogenous origin, 
the Cumans and the Teutonic order. The latter originated within Europe, but if 
any region can be assigned as its origin, it is EGE, which also generated a larger 
polity, Brandenburg-Prussia-Germany. There was also one polity that I classified 
as a relict, the Astrakhan Khanate, which was the largest piece left when the 
Golden Horde collapsed in the fifteenth century. Finally, each region was classified into the same four classes as in the previous section. The results are shown 
in Table 5.lb.

As we can see, the general pattern is consistent with the predictions of the 
frontier model. It is gratifying that all the Great Powers (England-U.K., CastileSpain, France, Brandenburg-Prussia-Germany, Austria, Lithuania-Poland, Byzantium, the Ottoman Empire, and Muscovy-Russia) originated from regions heavily 
influenced by frontiers. Equally revealing are areas that never experienced intense frontiers, for example, AQU-SFR and EPL-BEL-WRU. These regions were 
always objects of geopolitics, never its subjects.

There are also six anomalous cases, in which the frontier presence did not result 
in a large polity. Four regions (AND, NED, VLH, and SRU) were incorporated 
into empires originating from neighboring regions. One interesting case is SGE, 
which had a polity originating in it, Switzerland, that did not make the size 
threshold. The Swiss case is interesting because initially, during the fourteenthfifteenth centuries, the Swiss expanded their polity quite aggressively. But after 
the middle of the sixteenth century expansion ceased, even though there were 
apparently plenty of opportunities to expand north into the lesser imperial states.

A possible explanation of this failure is the negative influence of the rugged 
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 89 
topography on the scaling up of asabiya (Section 4.1.2). Another rugged region, 
ALB, may have failed to develop a strong polity for the same reason.

The greatest challenge to the model, however, is presented by the three cases of 
no frontiers, but empires. The first, medieval Poland (0.3 Mm2 in 1020 c.E.), is not 
a strong anomaly, because it apparently formed very much under pressure from 
the Frankish march, similarly to the nearby Bohemia. However, its conversion 
to Christianity was quite rapid, so that it experienced a high-intensity frontier 
only for two centuries (and thus failed to be classified as a prolonged frontier).

The second case is the Duchy of Burgundy. Burgundy arose as a scavenger state 
following the fourteenth-century French collapse. Its dukes then embarked on a 
program of territorial expansion, mainly relying on dynastic marriages. At its 
peak in 1480 c.E. it was about 0.13 Mm2, which is just over the threshold size.

The Burgundian state, however, turned out to be quite fragile, and collapsed in the 
late fifteenth century. Nevertheless, I believe that it presents a genuine anomaly 
for the frontier model, since instability was a general feature of most agrarian 
polities.

The last case, Savoy-Sardinia-Italy, appears to be the strongest anomaly. Incidentally, it is also one of the best examples of the reflux effect, since the state 
originated in Savoy, which is now part of France, and was successively pushed 
by its stronger neighbor over the centuries toward the east. Nevertheless, there is 
nothing even remotely resembling a metaethnic frontier in the Savoy case. And 
even though Italy has never managed to achieve Great Power status (some authors, 
however, do give it this status for the period 1870--1914), it has not collapsed, 
and even managed to acquire colonies in Africa. Thus, all hallmarks of empire 
are present (albeit not a very strong one), but the frontier model clearly does not 
apply. This anomalous case, therefore, is a clear indication that the frontier model 
cannot pretend to be a universal explanation of how all states arise.

5.3 POSITIONAL ADVANTAGE? 
So far I have been comparing the predictions of the frontier model to an implicit 
null hypothesis that polity size and frontiers are statistically independent of each 
other. A stronger test is to contrast the performance of the frontier model with an 
explicit alternative (Section 1.2). One possible alternative theory has already been 
