map at 1800 C.E. Thick black lines indicate the location of the Pyrenees and the Alps.

(After Artzrouni and Komlos 1996: Figure 4) 
GEOPOLITICS 23 
Figure 2.4: the 234 initial countries at 500 c.E. are reduced to 25 by the end of 
the simulation. The outlines of coastal countries ("France," "Spain," and "Italy") 
take shape rapidly, while inland countries take longer to solidify. Additionally, 
there is much more variability in the final configuration achieved away from the 
coasts in different realizations. Thus, the marchland effect has two aspects. First, 
countries enjoying it achieve somewhat larger size compared to more centrally 
located ones (this can be seen by the large size achieved by "Spain," "France," 
and "Sweden/Norway" in Figure 2.4). Second, their boundaries reach stability 
much faster than the boundaries of inland states.

To summarize, the Artzrouni and Komlos simulation provides a confirmation 
of the postulated effect of the marchland advantage. Additionally, the simulation suggests that the boundaries of present states, especially those with long sea 
borders (Spain, France, Italy, and Greece), may be determined in a large degree 
by geopolitical mechanisms. However, Artzrouni and Komlos are very careful to 
stress that simulation parameters must be tuned just right for the simulation to 
reach the desired equilibrium. While the circularity involved in parameter calibration weakens the result, we should keep in mind that the simulation is very 
parsimonious, having only five free parameters. The sensitivity to one parameter, f, is of particular interest to the question of the marchland effect. If f is 
set too low, then the simulations usually yielded just one or two countries with 
maritime borders to the west of Europe that swept eastward across the continent.

Their small effective perimeters kept their power high, allowing them eventually 
to annex all their neighbors.

Finally, the geopolitical simulation of Artzrouni and Komlos, similarly to analytical models advanced before, generates an essentially first-order behavior.

Large countries conquer smaller and eventually expand until they reach the limits set by imperial overstretch, where their size is stabilized. In other words, the 
model does not predict that states reaching too high a size will collapse.

2.2.3 Conflict-legitimacy Dynamics 
The geopolitical theory of Collins has three major principles (Collins 1986:168, 
1995: Figure 1): (1) territorial resource advantage, (2) marchland advantage, and 
(3) overextension as a result of increased logistic loads. Our modeling in previous sections suggests that these postulates lead to first-order dynamics characterized by initially accelerating territorial growth that eventually reaches a stable 
equilibrium. Geopolitical models do not predict the collapse of large powerful 
empires (although small states may be destroyed before they manage to grow 
above a critical size). Yet, historical empires exhibit a different behavior, because they always eventually collapse. When a dynamical system exhibits opposite trends (growth versus decline) for the same values of variables in the 
explanatory set, this means that there is another hidden variable that determines 
the direction of change, which we have not yet included in the set. Thus, our 
modeling efforts have already paid for themselves: they showed that we need to 
look for explanatory mechanisms other than pure geopolitical principles, in order 
to understand the rise and collapse of territorial empires. It appears that Collins 
has also reached the same conclusion, judging by his extensive discussion of 
mechanisms of state breakdown in the 1995 paper. Specifically, Collins discusses two theories: (1) the demographic-structural model (Goldstone 1991b), 
and (2) ruler legitimacy as affected by geopolitical power-prestige (Hanneman 
et al. 1995). Dynamical systems theory suggests that the key property of the postulated mechanisms of collapse is the time scale on which they act (the concept 
of temporal scale is also discussed by Collins; e.g., Collins 1995: Figure 6). Thus, 
our task, which will be largely pursued beyond the confines of this chapter, is 
to translate various postulated nongeopolitical mechanisms into models, determine whether these models are in principle capable of generating second-order 
dynamics, and, if so, derive testable predictions from them.

Although the conflict-legitimacy model of Hanneman et al. is not based on a 
geopolitical mechanism (in the strict sense), I will review it in this chapter, because this model is already well developed (and can be quickly summarized) and 
is closely connected with the models considered earlier. Actually, Hanneman et 
al. develop not one model, but a series of models of increasing complexity. This 
is a methodologically sound approach; in fact, I am in complete agreement with 
the philosophy of modeling as set out by Hanneman et al. To their excellent recommendations (see also Hanneman 1988), I would add only that more attention 
should be paid to a parallel development and consideration of analytical models.

The core of the theory advanced by Hanneman et al. focuses on the interaction 
between power-prestige, state legitimacy, and international conflict. Hanneman 
et al. assume that the motivation of rulers to initiate external conflict is directly 
proportional to the difference between their current legitimacy and the goal of 
maximum legitimacy. For any given level of conflict initiated, the degree of success is determined by the proportional superiority of the power of the focal state, 
relative to that of its rivals. Change in the state prestige is proportional to war 
success, and legitimacy follows, with delay, from prestige (Hanneman et al. 1995: 
17). Hanneman et al. do not explain why legitimacy should follow war success 
with a lag time. Yet, in their model they impose a substantial lag: whereas war 
occurs at every time step (they use a discrete-time framework), legitimacy follows 
with a lag of three time units. This would suggest that (crudely) on average it 
takes victory in three successive wars for the legitimacy of the state to increase 
substantially. I would argue, by contrast, that legitimacy operates on a much faster 
time scale. War victory is immediately followed by a rush of patriotism that floats 
up the fortunes of politicians, and, vice versa, war failure is immediately followed 
by disillusionment with the powers that be. If legitimacy were a slow variable, 
then there would be much less temptation for politicians to use "a small victorious 
war" to bolster their shaky legitimacy.

Hanneman et al. develop three models: ( 1) the core model that focuses on 
war legitimacy dynamics, (2) a more complex version that adds the costs and 
benefits of empire, and (3) the full model that further adds imperial capitalism and 
the military-industrial complex. Of particular interest to us is the second model 
because, for certain parameter values, it appears to predict repeated instances of 
imperial growth followed by breakdown. However, it appears that occurrence of 
these instances of state collapse depends in a critical way on the assumption of a 
GEOPOLITICS 25 
lag time with which legitimacy follows war success. To check whether this is true, 
I translated the core of the Hanneman model into a differential equation model.

In the Appendix (see Section A.1) I show that the legitimacy-conflict model is 
described by a single-dimensional ordinary differential equation. In other words, 
we again end up with a first-order model. This model can have multiple equilibria, 
and depending on the initial values of territory size and previous record of war 
success, the trajectory will be attracted to one or another of the stable ones. But 
the model is incapable of exhibiting boom/bust dynamics or sustained oscillations.

The inescapable conclusion, therefore, is that the interaction between legitimacy, 
war success, and territorial expansion cannot generate sustained imperial decline.
