is composed in a complex way from the asabiyas of various groups comprising 
it. As stated above, I focus on two main dimensions along which polities are 
structured. The first is the socioeconomic stratification, where we can distinguish 
elites who hold power from commoners concerned with producing goods. The 
second is the ethnic dimension, where we can distinguish core ethnies from the 
rest (alloethnies). For example, the core ethnies of the European Great Powers 
of the eighteenth century are Castilians in Spain, English in the British Empire, 
northern French (speakers of langue d'oi1) in France, Austrian Germans in the 
Habsburg Empire, Prussians in the Kingdom of Prussia, and Russians ( velikorossy) in the Russian Empire. This scheme, of course, greatly oversimplifies the 
historical agrarian societies, but we must start somewhere.

Another simplifying assumption that I will make is that each empire has at 
its core a particular group, whose asabiya is of overriding importance to the empire's success or failure. One type of such an imperial core group is simply the 
elites of the core ethnie, who use their high asabiya to coerce compliance from 
both their own commoners and alloethnic elites (who, in turn, coerce alloethnic 
commoners). The second type is a more vertically integrated (or demotic, using 
Anthony Smith's classification) core ethnie, in which commoners of the core ethnie share a substantial degree of ethnic solidarity with their elites. The third type, 
alternatively, is characterized by lateral empire-wide integration of the elites (the 
aristocratic ethnie of Smith), who rule over ethnically heterogeneous commoners.

Thus, I do not mean to imply that a core group must have hard boundaries. Rather, 
cores have fuzzy boundaries and internal structure, e.g., segmentary organization.

Furthermore, although as the first step in theory building I tie polity success at 
territorial expansion to the asabiya of the core group, asabiyas of other groups, 
and their attitudes (cooperative, acquiescent, or antagonistic), will eventually also 
have to be included in the analysis.

Incidentally, it is possible for a polity to have two distinct cores, as in the 
sixteenth century Habsburg Empire of Charles V (Castilians and Austrian Germans), but such situations appear to be rather unstable. Thus, Charles V's empire, 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 51 
upon his resignation, was divided between the Austrian and Castilian branches of 
Habsburgs.

There is some amount of controversy about the relationship between nationality and the state, with some arguing that it is states that invent nationality, while 
others arguing that, on the contrary, it is nations that construct states around 
themselves. The approach I take in this book is that ethnie and polity exist in a 
state of dynamic interaction. The core ethnie provides the seed around which the 
polity crystallizes. But polity also affects ethnic dynamics. For example, being in 
the same polity sets up conditions for ethnic assimilation of alloethnic elites and 
commoners (this will be pursued in Chapter 6). Thus, the relationship between 
ethnie and polity is like that between a chicken and an egg; neither is primary, 
and both are components of an ethnopolitical system. Still, because both polities 
and ethnies have beginnings (and endings), we must confront the question of 
how ethnopolitical systems get started. The theory developed here provides an 
answer: an ethnic group characterized by high asabiya ( 1) expands the territory 
it controls, (2) increases the number of its members through population growth, 
colonization, and ethnic assimilation, and (3) advances up the social scale from 
subethnie to ethnie to, eventually, metaethnie. This proposition, however, raises 
another question: how do ethnic groups acquire high asabiya, and why do they 
eventually lose it? The development of a high level of asabiya that is capable of 
scaling up (from subethnie to ethnie, etc.) is a necessary condition for ethnogenesis, because otherwise small-level ethnic groups would never be able to evolve 
into a full-blown ethnie. Perhaps we should call this process "ethnopolitogenesis," because usually polity formation appears to be inextricably intertwined with 
ethnie formation.

4.1.1 Factors Causing Solidarity Increase 
So far I have treated asabiya as an exogenous variable: it is something that is 
hypothesized to affect the territorial dynamics, but it is not yet clear what factors 
cause collective solidarity to increase or decline. Thus, the main objective in this 
chapter is to endogenize asabiya.

One possible approach to solving this problem is to think about specific social 
mechanisms that are used by groups to maintain high levels of collective solidarity. One of the most important of such mechanisms is clearly religion. Thus, 
Collins (1992) devotes a whole chapter to discussing Durkheim's theory of social rituals. But all societies have rituals and some form of religion, yet some 
societies are more cohesive than others. That is, identifying any specific cultural 
mechanism of creating and maintaining asabiya does not help us with the main 
question. Is it possible to abstract away from the cultural forms asabiya takes and 
focus somehow on its essence? 
If we follow this tack, then we have only one general source of insights: the 
theory of multilevel selection. Let us see how far this approach could take us. The 
key prediction of the theory, as discussed in the previous chapter, is that grouplevel selection operates on intergroup variation, while individual-level selection 
operates on intragroup variation among individuals. The evolution of solidaristic 
(group-beneficial but individually costly) behaviors is enhanced by conditions that 
increase intergroup variation and decrease intragroup variation. What conditions 
are these? I can think of three.

Intergroup Conflict 
The first factor that may affect the evolution of collective solidarity is the frequency and intensity of intergroup conflict. Two extremes may be imagined: one 
is location near the center of a territorially extensive empire during the periods 
when the empire is strong enough to maintain internal peace. The opposite end 
of the spectrum is the stateless environment-"the tribal war zone" (Ferguson 
and Whitehead 1992), in which each tribe is simultaneously a potential aggressor 
and a potential victim. Current anthropological evidence suggests that stateless 
societies were typically characterized by incessant warfare (Keely 1997).

The Ratio of Population to Resources 
The second factor is the population density in relation to the carrying capacity of 
the local region. High population density pressing against the subsistence limit 
should cause persistent resource shortages, which promote intragroup competition 
and thus have a corrosive effect on group solidarity. Here we should distinguish 
the situations of mild and severe resource shortages. A mild resource shortage, 
or even an anticipated future shortage, may act to promote solidaristic action to 
solve the problem. Groups may employ some technology for food production 
intensification, or they may organize to deprive neighboring groups of their resources. However, as formal models of preindustrial population dynamics that 
combine Malthusian and Boserupian mechanisms indicate, economic change can 
win only a temporary respite from marginal immiseration (Wood 1998). When 
severe and persistent resource shortages develop, the ability of a group for collective action should be greatly diminished. It is particularly difficult to organize 
a successful military action: starving people do not make good fighters. As a 
result, intergroup competition should be reduced, while intragroup competition is 
enhanced, since it becomes much easier to think of another group member as a 
