A similar analysis was performed on political instability as response variable 
(I log-transformed W, in order to make the data more normally distributed). The 
proportion of variance explained by the model declined from the earliest to the 
latest period (Table 8.2). The population density at time t-r had a positive effect 
on instability at time t (Figure 8.8). The past value of instability (WI-T) also had 
a positive effect on the present instability (W,) (Figure 8.8).

In summary, the analysis of Chinese data provides strong empirical confirmation of the endogenous version of the demographic-structural model. Both links, 
from population to instability and back, are substantiated in the data. The coefficients of determination are high, generally over 50% (except in the case of the 
N on W effect during the third period).

8.5 SUMMARY 
• I searched the literature to locate any data set on relative population fluctuations that was at least 5 centuries long, and sampled at intervals of 50 
years or better. I identified a number of such data sets from Europe, China, 
6 
4 
2 
g .2 
0 
~ 
~ .4 
~ ..6 
Figure 8.8 The effect of population density and previous political instability on the current 
instability in China during the first period (200 B.C.B.-430 c.B.).

and North America. Some data were historical reconstructions of population 
dynamics, others relied on archaeological data.

• Standard approaches to nonlinear time-series analysis suggest that in the 
best historical data sets the evidence for second-order regulation (England, 
China) and periodicity (England, Mesa Verde) is quite strong. A general 
pattern, common to all the data sets, is oscillations-periods of population 
growth, followed by decline-characterized by a variable degree of periodicity. Population declines tend to occur at intervals of 2-3 centuries.

• The observed patterns are consistent with predictions of the demographicstructural theory {Section 7 .2), which also predicts somewhat irregular oscillations with an average period of 2-3 centuries. This result, therefore, 
constitutes an empirical confirmation of the demographic-structural theory.

However, informal calculations suggest that most second-order processes involving population size as one of the main variables should lead to oscillations of roughly the same period. Thus, the possibility that some other theory 
may explain these patterns as well remains open.

• A direct test of the demographic-structural model, addressing the caveat 
above, was performed by jointly analyzing the data on population numbers 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 169 
and the incidence of internal warfare (an index of political instability). The 
regression results suggest that both the influence of density on instability, 
and the reverse connection, are statistically highly significant. Time-series 
models fitted to the data generally resolve a high proportion of the variance.

Thus, at least in one case, China from 200 B.C.E. to 1710 c.E., we have direct 
and quantitative evidence for the demographic-structural theory.

Chapter Nine 
Case Studies 
One of the main themes of this book is the need for an objective, rigorous approach to testing various theories explaining historical dynamics. Following this 
approach, I discussed several such theories, including geopolitical, ethnodynamic, 
and demographic-structural ones. All theories were subjected to one or more empirical tests, which they passed with various degrees of success. So it seems that 
each theory, when examined separately, has some empirical justification. However, it is not yet clear how we should combine the various models together 
to explain the holistic phenomenon of historical dynamics. We need to generate ideas, and this requires a less rigorous attitude than that involved in testing 
the hypotheses based on the ideas. Accordingly, in this penultimate chapter, I 
shift gears and use a very different approach from the one used before. My goal 
is to look at some specific case studies and discuss how specific mechanisms 
may be operating in each particular case, how different mechanisms may interact 
with each other, and what sorts of more rigorous hypotheses we may attempt to 
develop for future research.

I chose to focus on two polities: France and Russia in the longue duree (from 
the origins to 1900 C.E.). These two cases are a sample from the universe of 
successful European territorial empires (in particular, both were members of the 
Great Powers club during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries). Both polities 
are situated on the northern European plain, although France is at its extreme 
western end, while Russia occupies the opposite northeastern quadrant. The two 
countries, however, followed very different social, political, and economic trajectories. Thus, any similarities that may emerge from the comparison have a good 
potential as generalizations.

My discussion of historical dynamics in the two case studies is organized as 
follows. First, I focus on the dynamics of asabiya and the associated issues of 
frontiers and ethnogenesis. Second, I trace out the secular cycles involving linked 
demographic, social, and political processes.

9.1 FRANCE 
9.1.1 The Frontier Origins 
On the Roman Frontier 
The western end of the northern European plain during the first two millennia c.E.

was successively incorporated into three polities: the Roman Empire, the Frankish 
CASE STUDIES 171 
Empire, and the Kingdom (later Republic) of France. After the Roman conquest 
and until the beginning of the third century, the Roman frontier ran through 
what is now Benelux and Western Germany (the cultural regions of NED, WGE, 
and SGE; see Figure 5.1 and Appendix B). Northern and eastern France (NFR 
and EFR) were lightly affected by the frontier. The situation changed during the 
calamitous third century, when the Roman Empire experienced a prolonged period of state collapse and internal warfare. During this time of trouble, the Roman 
frontier became completely porous to Germanic invaders, who repeatedly devastated the Roman Gaul. Three groups, Franci, Burgundi, and Alamanni, coalesced 
on or moved near the Roman border and penetrated into formerly Roman territory 
to a greater or lesser degree (Geary 1988; Wolfram 1997). As a result, the NFR 
and EFR regions themselves became part of the Roman frontier.

After the respite of the relatively stable fourth century (which, however, was 
characterized by continued southward penetration by the Franks), the "barbarian" 
advance resumed. The Franks expanded to incorporate most of NFR into their 
