Russia directly, instead relying on local rulers to deliver tribute. This relationship 
required periodic punitive expeditions to remind both the elites and the population of the alternative to paying taxes. There were a number of urban risings in 
Russia against the Mongols during the late thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.

People objected particularly to the enslaving of householders who could not pay 
their dues (Hosking 2001 :55). Second, no steppe ruler could completely control 
all his followers, and there was a certain amount of raiding, which intensified 
when the central authority in the Golden Horde weakened in the middle of the 
fourteenth century.

By the middle of the fifteenth century, the Golden Horde had undergone a final 
dissolution. Three strong polities arose on its former periphery: the Principality 
of Moscow and the .Khanates of Kazan and Crimea. Russian lands came under 
an extremely intense raiding pressure from the Kazan and Crimean Tatars. The 
prime motivation of nomadic raiders was obtaining slaves. By some estimates, 
150,000 to 200,000 Russians were captured in the first half of the seventeenth 
century (.Khodarkovsky 2002:22) 
I rate the intensity of the metaethnic frontier in CRU during the thirteenth to 
the sixteenth centuries as 9, the maximum possible value. The religious divide 
between Christianity and Islam gets a rating of 3, the linguistic difference is 2, 
the economic way of life is 2, and the intensity of warfare is 2. The last index reflects the essentially genocidal quality of the steppe frontier during this 
period. The large swath of the forest-steppe transitional zone was depopulated 
due to the combined effects of mortality and slave taking resulting from raids, 
and emigration of the remaining population to more protected regions. Thus, the 
former core of the Kievan state was completely abandoned by agriculturalists.

Most of the Principality of Ryazan was also abandoned, including the old capital (the new capital had to be moved northwest to Pereyaslavl-Ryazansky). The 
remaining population was hanging on precariously in the northwestern corner of 
the principality.

The steppe frontier was not the only metaethnic fault line running through 
Russia in the first half of the second millennium. Another source of geopolitical pressure on the lands of east Slavs was the Lithuanian state, which arose 
in the thirteenth century and rapidly grew during the fourteenth century, conquering most of the former Kievan Rus, except the northwestern (Novgorod and 
Pskov) and northeastern (Vladimir-Suzdal) lands. Interestingly, the expansion of 
this empire, the largest in Europe of the fifteenth century, did not result in establishing an intense metaethnic fault line. The initially pagan Lithuanian elites 
were very rapidly assimilated to the culture of Kievan Rus. The Lithuanian army, 
administration, legal system, and finance were organized on the Russian pattern, and Russian became the official language of the new state (Riazanovsky 
2000:134). Even when the Lithuanian/west Russian nobles began converting to 
Catholicism, as a part of Polonization resulting from the Poland-Lithuania dynastic union of 1385, no sharp ethnic boundaries arose. Up to the twentieth century, 
Slavic dialects between Moscow and Warsaw formed a seamless linguistic matrix. There was no sharp religious fault line, because Polonization affected primarily the upper strata (and even them incompletely, since many nobles stayed 
Orthodox). Thus, the "civilizational fault line" (sensu Huntington 1996) between 
the Catholic and Orthodox worlds was rather blurred in this part of Eastern 
Europe.

A rather different situation developed to the north. During the thirteenth century, 
the east Baltic region became one of the crusading frontiers of Latin Christendom 
(Shaskolsky 1978; Bartlett 1993; Murray 2001). The Danes invaded Estonia, the 
German crusading knights intruded in Livonia, and the Swedes conquered southern 
Finland. These Germanic-speaking Catholic peoples began exerting a significant 
amount of pressure on the northwestern Russian city-republics of Pskov and Novgorod. In my view, the Baltic frontier qualifies as a major metaethnic fault line for 
at least two reasons.

First, there is the ideological dimension-a crusade was declared against the 
enemies of Latin Christians, pagans as well as "schismatics." This development 
suggests that by the 1240s the western and eastern brands of Christianity had 
diverged far enough to be considered separate metaethnies. It is interesting that it 
was during the thirteenth century that the metaethnonym Nemtsy arose in Russian 
(Lind 2001). Nemtsy designated all non-Slavic peoples of western Europe. During 
the thirteenth century old ethnic terms for Danes and Swedes (Don' and Svei) 
completely disappeared from the Russian language. When the need to distinguish 
between various ethnic groups of Nemtsy arose around 1500 c.E., new terms 
CASE STUDIES 191 
had to be created (Datchane, Shvedy), while Nemtsy became reserved for the 
Germans.

The second reason is the intensity of conflict, which at times acquired ethnocidal and even genocidal character. The impact of Baltic Crusades on native 
peoples such as the Prussians is well known. But even as late as the sixteenth 
century, during the Livonian War, the fighting on the frontier was so intense that 
the entire Novgorodian region was largely depopulated.

To summarize, after the Kievan Rus imploded, its northern borderlands became "contested grounds," squeezed between two metaethnic frontiers. The most 
intense metaethnic fault line resulted from a northward shift of the steppe frontier. The pressure from the steppe resulted in a depopulation of the UKR and 
SRU regions, while the CRU and KAZ regions saw the formation of multiple 
centers of power during the fifteenth century (Tver, Moscow, and Kazan). The 
second metaethnic frontier, of somewhat lower intensity (I rate it as 6), arose in 
the northwest. When the Muscovite state conquered Novgorod (and Tver) by the 
end of the fifteenth century, it came under the influence of both frontiers. The 
subsequent history of Russia is very much the story of how these frontiers were 
moved away from the Volga-Oka heartland. Russia was a frontier state until at 
least the eighteenth century. The steppe frontier was closed down only with the 
conquest of the Crimean Khanate in the late eighteenth century. The acquisition 
of Poland and Finland around the same time, as well as the entry of Russia into 
the system of European Great Powers also changed the quality of the Baltic frontier, but these developments occurred toward the end of the period of interest, so 
I will not pursue it here.

9.2.2 Secular Waves 
The Kievan Wave 
Although the population of Kievan Rus grew rapidly during the eleventh century, 
from around 3.5 million in 1000 c.E. (McEvedy and Jones 1978) to 7-8 million in 
the twelfth century (Riazanovsky 2000:48), it is unlikely that the peasant/land ratio was anywhere near the Malthusian subsistence limits. A much greater threat to 
the political stability of the Kievan state came from the growth of the elites, particularly from "the ever-increasing princely family with its numerous branches" 
as Riazanovsky (2000:49) characterized them.

The Kievan state reached its zenith during the reign of Iaroslav the Wise ( 1019-
1054). The reigns of Iaroslav's successors introduced a long period of decline, 
characterized by increasing intraelite conflict and eventually state collapse. Of 
the 170 years following Iaroslav's death, 80 witnessed civil war (Pogodin, cited 
in Riazanovsky 2000}. However, the decentralization phase of the secular cycle 
had two periods of particularly intense internal conflict with a period of relative 
stability in between (we have already noticed this pattern in the French case). The 
