of opposite curvature (see Figure 6.3t). Furthermore, spatial models also all predict some acceleration during the initial stages of the conversion process, which 
again does not help to explain the observed patters. In fact, the concave shape 
of the function at low C has some resemblance to the noninteractive process 
(see Figure 6.3b). This observation raises the following possibility: the process 
is noninteractive during the very early stages, and then becomes autocatalytic.

For example, initially the proportion of converts in the population increases as 
a result of immigration. As the number of converts builds up, the autocatalytic 
part of the process rapidly swamps the increase due to immigration. I investigated this scenario with an explicit model, C = (p + rC)(l- C), and found that 
as long as p « r, that is the immigration rate is small, the model predicts precisely the shape observed in the data. An example of the pattern predicted by the 
immigration-autocatalytic growth model is given in Figure 6.6b.

To summarize, the analysis of the Bulliet data indicates that the autocatalytic 
model fits the empirical patterns overwhelmingly better than the two alternatives, the noninteractive and threshold models. In fact, the autocatalytic model 
achieves an unheard-of precision (at least in nonphysical sciences) of 99.98%.

However, this excellent fit is partly due to the specific viewpoint chosen, that 
is, fitting temporal trajectories. A more detailed investigation of the relationship 
between the state variable (C) and its rate of change as well as its relative rate 
110 
3 
Q) 
C) 
r:::: 
tU 2 .s:: 
(J 
0 
.!! 
e 
Q) 
~ ~ 
0 
3 
Q) 
C) 
r:::: 
tU 2 .s:: 
(J 
0 
.!! 
tU 
...

Q) 
1 .0!: 
16 
"! 
0 
\ 
\ 
0.0 
0.0 
~ ........ .......__......._ 
-4-- Iran 
--A- Spain 
........ ...._ __ ._ 
-- 0.5 
-+-model 
0.5 
Proportion converted 
1.0 
1.0 
Figure 6.6 (a) Iran and Spain data plotted on a tIC- C phase plot. Units of the rate of 
change C are century-•. (b) Relationship between the relative rate of change and proportion converted predicted by the immigration-autocatalytic model.

of change reveals some discrepancies between the predictions of the autocatalytic 
model and the data. We also found that a somewhat more complex alternative to 
the simple autocatalytic model, the immigration-autocatalytic process, provides a 
better empirical fit. It is encouraging that the best-fitting model, even though it 
was suggested by a post hoc pattern in the data, appears to correspond well with 
our understanding of what historically happened in Spain after Islamic conquest, 
when there was indeed a substantial immigration by Muslim Arabs and Berbers.

However, we should note that only two replicates are currently available (which is 
the minimum amount to guard against sampling error). Furthermore, there is the 
ETHNOKINETICS 111 
possibility that the observed nonlinearity is a result of some (unknown) bias in the 
procedure used by Bulliet to estimate conversion dates. Finally, the discrepancy 
is rather minor, and at best suggests a second-order improvement of the basic 
autocatalytic model. The simple fact of the matter is that the basic autocatalytic 
model fits the data awfully well.

6.3.2 The Rise of Christianity 
The second case study is more qualitative, simply because we do not have as good 
data sets documenting the dynamics of conversion to Christianity, compared to 
the on~s developed by Bulliet for conversion to Islam. The material in this section 
is based on Rodney Stark's The Rise of Christianity (1996).

When discussing the rise of Christianity, historians are impressed by how few 
Christians there were during the first two centuries c.E., and how suddenly their 
numbers grew-exploded-during the second half of the third century. Most historians of early Christianity concluded that some extraordinary process of mass 
conversions must have taken place to explain this astonishing expansion (see Stark 
1996:14 for quotes). Stark argues forcefully that this argument is based on a misappreciation of the nature of the autocatalytic process. The striking fact about 
such autocatalytic processes as the exponential or the logistic is that they appear 
to go through discontinuous stages of growth, while the basic driving mechanism 
does not change. The driving mechanism is the relative conversion rate (the number of new members per current member that convert in a unit of time). While the 
relative rate stays constant, the absolute rate (the product of the relative rate and 
the proportion already converted) increases with time, thus generating an illusion 
of the process going through qualitatively different stages. , 
Stark illustrates this phenomenon with an estimated growth curve or' Christians 
