potential victim. Only highly solidaristic groups can resist the corrosive effect of 
severe and prolonged resource shortage without splintering.

By contrast, population density substantially below the carrying capacity means 
that there is a surplus of food in a typical year. Occasional subsistence crises 
are short in duration and can be buffered by communal action, such as surplus 
storing and food sharing. Thus, resource competition is reduced or entirely absent.

As a result, intragroup variation in fitness is low, which promotes the evolution 
of group-directed behaviors. Note that when I speak of "carrying capacity," I 
mean the population density ceiling imposed by the ability to produce resources, 
mainly food. The actual population density equilibrium may be set at a fraction 
of the carrying capacity by factors other than food production, most notably by 
increased mortality due to conflict. Small-scale polities, in which all members 
are potentially exposed to the dangers of external warfare (intergroup conflict), 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 53 
should be particularly likely to have an equilibrium density much below carrying 
capacity. This idea is supported by formal models (Thrchin and Korotayev 2003).

Thus, the two factors, conflict intensity and population density, are related.

Ethnic Boundaries 
The other feature that intergroup conflict and population density have in common 
is that they create conditions favoring asabiya increase in small-scale groups.

Larger-scale groups can be created temporarily as a result of successful conquest 
by one particularly solidaristic tribe. But what mechanisms would maintain the 
cohesiveness of the larger group as one generation is succeeded by another? 
Apparently none. In the environment of a multitude of small groups, a large 
group should not be able to keep its cohesiveness for many generations, because 
this group will not be threatened by external forces (being the largest around).

Internally divisive issues will eventually destroy the asabiya of the large group, 
unless it is "disciplined" by an external threat. Furthermore, in the tribal war zone 
it is common for the subgroups comprising the large group to be ethnically as 
similar to each other as they are to small groups outside the large group. The 
large group is likely to have a blurred symbolic boundary that separates it from 
other groups, with all the negative consequences for maintaining high levels of 
asabiya.

Thus, it is hard to imagine how large groups can arise and maintain themselves 
in a homogeneous environment populated by many small groups, with an ethnic 
distance separating each pair of groups of roughly the same order of magnitude.

But what if there is a major ethnic boundary? I will call it a metaethnic fault line, 
to emphasize the scale of ethnic distance separating groups on different sides of 
the boundary. A small group near such a boundary will be confronted with very 
different others, dwarfing in their "othemess" neighboring groups that are on the 
same side of the metaethnic line. Warfare across the metaethnic line is likely to 
be much more violent, with a higher level of atrocities and lethality (e.g., Dower 
1986). This should lead to enhanced alliance formation among groups on the 
same side of the boundary. Alternatively, if small groups on the same side of the 
metaethnic frontier are unified by force, they are more likely to continue sticking 
together. Furthermore, any group demarcation symbols developed in opposition to 
the others across the boundary are likely to prove integrating with respect to ethnically similar groups on the same side of the boundary. In short, location near a 
metaethnic fault line creates conditions for the "stairway effect" in which symbols 
developed for marking boundaries of a small group are applied to successively 
larger-scale groups. Thus, my third proposed factor that enhances evolution of 
asabiya (for large-scale groups) is location near a major ethnic boundary.

4.1.2 Imperial Boundaries and Metaethnic Fault Lines 
The three factors that I propose do not operate independently of each other. In 
fact, there is one set of conditions where they all work synergistically: frontier 
zones of large empires, and particularly empires with vigorous ideologies. During 
the agrarian period of human evolution, the most internally integrative and externally divisive ideologies were, of course, the major religions of the exclusionary 
kind (Stark 1996). Exclusionary religions are those that disallow simultaneous 
membership in other religions or cults. Exclusionary religions often provide the 
symbolic markers for metaethnic fault lines, and therefore imperial boundaries 
and metaethnic fault lines often coincide (but not always, since religion can spread 
beyond the imperial boundary).

I should emphasize that a combined imperial/metaethnic boundary typically 
creates a frontier zone, that is, a two-dimensional area characterized not only by 
its length along the boundary, but also by its width (and, in any case, boundaries 
of preindustrial polities were much less like one-dimensional lines than they are 
today). There are two kinds of frontier: between an empire and a stateless (but not 
"chiefdomless") tribal zone, and between two empires. According to the argument 
I advanced above, the tribal side of the frontier should provide ideal conditions 
for (1) increase of asabiya intensity, and (2) increase in the asabiya scale (that is, 
the social scale of the group that is integrated by asabiya). Because the tribal zone 
is stateless, there is constant warfare among the ethnic groups inhabiting it, and 
thus population density should be kept below the subsistence carrying capacity.

Frontiers on the imperial side are subject to much the same pressures. One potential difference is that vigorous empires prevent internecine fighting. However, 
there is usually plenty of pressure and/or opportunities coming from the other 
side of the boundary, so imperial frontiers should provide excellent conditions 
for asabiya increase. If a very different imperial ideology (religion) is present on 
the other side of the boundary (this is the case of the frontier between two empires), then such a situation provides a particularly strong incentive for asabiya 
increase. Finally, in mature empires, in which central regions have lost much of 
their collective solidarity (because of lack of conflict and high population density 
there), frontier regions may acquire their own identity, separate from both the 
parent empire and the enemy on the other side of the border. This process may 
cause a new highly solidaristic group to arise, which will eventually establish its 
own empire.

Additional Factors That May Affect Asabiya 
Although I stress intergroup conflict, low population density, and metaethnic 
boundaries as the main factors that generate increased asabiya, one can think 
of additional variables that may or may not be important. First, group selection 
theory suggests that it is much easier for collective solidarity to increase in small 
