discussed in Section 2.2.2. Recollect that the Collins geopolitical theory postulates 
a positional advantage (a "marchland effect") to polities expanding from an area 
that is easy to defend. We can use the empirical machinery developed in this 
chapter to test the effect of marchland position.

As a first step in addressing the effect of protected position, I will focus on the 
proportion of the boundary of the polity that is coastline (Artzrouni and Komlos 
1996). A more sophisticated analysis would also include the effect of mountainous terrain. However, estimating the effect of topography on the defensibility of 
a border is not straightforward. For example, we cannot just use the average elevation in the area, since low-elevation but very rugged hills can present a more 
significant barrier to invading armies than a high-elevation plateau. Thus, I will 
leave such refinements to future work, and for now use a cruder index that incorporates only the effect of large bodies of water (seas, straights, etc.) on the 
defensibility of a border.

To come up with a rough index of positional vulnerability, I approximated 
each cultural region by a rectangle and scored how many sides of the rectangle 
were inland versus coastlines. The index, therefore, ranged from 0 to 4, with 0 
corresponding to an island region, and 4 to a landlocked region. There was only 
one region with the vulnerability index of 0 (IRL), nine regions with index 1, 
six with index 2, sixteen with index 3, and eighteen with index 4. I combined 
regions with indices 0-2 into one class, to obtain three vulnerability classes with 
roughly the same number of cases in each (16, 16, and 18).

Because the vulnerability index is a static measure, I combined my two data 
sets on polity sizes (before and after 1000 c.E.) into one. If a region had two polities, I retained the largest. I then classified each region according to the maximum 
polity area it achieved. In order not to depend too much on the specific threshold 
size, I used two: 0.1 and 0.3 Mm2• This approach yielded three size classes of 
polities: small (0-0.1 Mm2), medium (0.1-0.3 Mm2), and large(> 0.3 Mm2 ).

Examining the results, sorted by vulnerability and polity size classes, we see 
that there is no apparent connection between the two (Table 5.2). Thus, the inescapable conclusion is that geographical position does not affect the eventual 
polity size either positively or negatively. This conclusion must be tempered by 
the crudity of the procedure I used to generate data in Table 5.2. However, some 
further qualitative consideration suggests that, if a more sophisticated test finds 
a relationship between marchland advantage and geopolitical success, it will be 
weak. A major geographical feature of Europe is the plain running from southwestern France through northern France, Germany, Poland, Belarus and Ukraine, 
and Russia. There are no significant mountain chains interrupting this plain. Existence was always precarious here (as the example of Poland shows most graphically). Yet, most of the European great powers originated precisely in this swath 
of territory (France, Frankish Empire, Holy Roman Empire, Prussia-Germany, 
Lithuania-Poland, Kievan Russia, and Muscovy-Russia, to name just the largest 
ones). With so many counterexamples, it is unlikely that positional advantage 
would help explain historical dynamics in Europe. At best, it is a factor of secondary importance.

Table S.l Results of the empirical test of the positional effects model.

Vulnerability Polities 
Index Small Medium Large n 
0-2 5 5 6 16 
3 7 3 6 16 
4 6 7 5 18 
AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 91 
5.4 CONCLUSION: THE MAKING OF EUROPE 
In a paper on the history of European state-making written a quarter of a century 
ago, Charles Tilly asked, "At each point in time from 1500 forward, what features of a political unit would have permitted us to anticipate whether it would ( 1) 
survive into the following period as a distinct unit; (2) undergo territorial consolidation, centralization, (3) become the nucleus of a national state?" (1975:40). This 
is precisely the kind of question that motivates the theory developed in this book.

I cannot claim that the metaethnic frontier theory gives a precise and accurate answer for the territorial dynamics of every European state. However, I believe that 
the theory explains the general pattern of European political development-"the 
making -of Europe" (Bartlett 1993).

A particularly lucid exposition of this general pattern is found in the work of 
Stein Rokkan (1975; Rokkan and Urwin 1982). Rokkan pointed out that geopolitically the early modern Europe can be divided into a series of bands, in which aggressive state-building regions alternated with politically weak, fragmented areas.

In the middle there is a belt of territorial1y fragmented but economically vibrant 
city-states that runs from the North Sea and the Baltic south along the Rhine 
and into Italy. To the west of this "trade-route belt" there is an area of strong 
conquest centers ("the seaward empire nations"): Denmark, England, France, and 
Spain. Further to the west lies a band of politically weak territories ("seaward 
peripheries"): Iceland, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and Brittany. On the other side 
of the central trading belt, the situation is a mirror image of the west. First, there 
is a band of "the landward empire nations": Sweden, Prussia, Bavaria, and Austria. Next comes a band of "landward peripheries": Finland, Bohemia, Poland, 
and Hungary. Thus, "paradoxically the history of Europe is one of center formation at the periphery of a network of strong and independent cities" (Rokkan 
1975:576).

The theory advanced and tested in Chapters 3-5 suggests that there is nothing paradoxical about this striking pattern. The explanation has two aspects: the 
spread of state by "contagion" via the metaethnic frontier mechanism, and a 
slow (centuries-long) decay of asabiya in imperial cores. However, in order to 
understand which regions develop strong states and which fragment and are conquered after 1500, we must go back to the Carolingian Europe, which itself is 
explained by the Roman Europe (and, incidentally, the rise of Rome can also 
be traced to the dynamics of the Mediterranean region of the early first millennium B.C.E. ). The Rhenish frontier of the Roman Empire, for reasons amply 
discussed in Section 5.2.1, became the core region of a series of Germanic empires: the Merovingians, the Carolingians, and the Ottonians. Thus, the central 
belt of highly urbanized and politically fragmented polities is comprised of two 
former imperial cores (the classic Roman and medieval German).

The key period for the making of modern Europe was the post-Carolingian 
ninth and tenth centuries (Bartlett 1993), when Latin Christendom was assaulted 
on all sides by the Vikings, Saracens, Magyars, and Polabian Slavs. A set of defensive frontiers-the Carolingian marches-formed to respond to these threats.

The attention of new polities forming on the marches was directed outward.' 
West and southwest of the Carolingian core, strong conquest polities arose on 
the Breton and Spanish marches, and in England, once it was brought into the 
Latin Christian world by the Norman conquest. In the north, the Scandinavian 
world was incorporated by conversion, rather than conquest, and its main direction of expansion was east, simply because there were few opportunities in the 
western (Iceland) and northern (Lapland) directions. Finally, east of the core two 
conquest centers developed: one on the Saxon-Slavic frontier (Drang nach Osten, 
eventually leading to the formation of Brandenburg-Prussia), and the other on the 
Bavarian-Magyar frontier (eventually leading to the Habsburg Austria).

In summary, I argue that the metaethnic frontier theory provides a coherent 
explanation for the spatiotemporal pattern of political development in the postRoman Europe. It also gives a more accurate representation of the pattern. For 
example, Rokkan rather arbitrarily assigned Denmark to the seaward, but Sweden 
