simulation assumes that as soon as a cell is taken over, its inhabitants immediately 
transfer their loyalty to the conquering empire (or, alternatively, are immediately 
replaced with colonists). This is a very serious flaw, because ethnokinetic processes such as ethnic assimilation clearly take time. This aspect of the problem 
is pursued in Chapter 6.

The third large area in which the theory needs more development is the dynamics of different social strata (most importantly for our purposes, commoners and 
elites ), including their population dynamics, as well as upward/downward mobility. This is also a serious omission, because the degree of collective solidarity 
that ties different strata together in a polity is an important variable in itself. Furthermore, population dynamics is an important determinant of economic power 
of the state. Some initial steps in developing theory addressing these issues are 
made in Chapter 7.

4.3 SUMMARY 
• The main objective of this chapter was to endogenize the concept of asabiya 
(capacity for collective action). This means that we need to advance a theory 
specifying variables that cause asabiya to increase or decline.

• We turn to the theory of multilevel selection for theoretical insights as to 
what conditions favor evolution of collective solidarity. Multilevel selection 
theory states that selection for group-beneficial but individual-costly behaviors is promoted when intragroup variation in fitness is minimized, while 
intergroup variation in fitness is maximized. This argument suggests at least 
three variables that should affect evolution of asabiya.

• The first variable is the degree to which the environment of a group is pacified. Because the primary source of intergroup variation is conflict between 
groups, location in a stateless environment should promote asabiya increase, 
while location near the center of a large polity (far from boundaries where 
warfare mainly occurs) should promote asabiya decrease.

• The second variable is population density in relation to the carrying capacity.

Density pushing at the subsistence limits promotes intragroup competition, 
and causes asabiya to decline. Low population density implies low intragroup competition, and conditions favoring the increase of asabiya. Note 
that this variable is correlated with the first, since mortality rates in stateless 
environments tend to be higher than in the centers of large polities, resulting 
in population densities substantially below the carrying capacity.

• The first two variables primarily affect the conditions favoring increase in 
the asabiya of small-scale ethnic groups. The third variable, location near 
a major metaethnic fault line, creates condition for the widening of asabiya 
profiles. The general mechanism is the expansion of the symbolically demarcated ethnic boundary to encompass a larger-scale group, in opposition to 
the very alien group (or groups) situated on the other side of the metaethnic 
fault line.

• Metaethnic fault lines may coincide with imperial boundaries, creating regions that I call metaethnic frontiers. Metaethnic frontiers are regions where 
all three factors (intergroup conflict, population density, and deep ethnic divides) work synergistically. Thus, the theory developed in this chapter makes 
the prediction that metaethnic frontiers are asabiya "crucibles." 
• Conditions most favorable to asabiya increase should be the frontiers of a 
major empire, particularly if it is also a carrier of a universal religion, abutting stateless hinterlands. Imperial frontiers can exert a "push" or "pull" (or 
both) on the tribal zone. When empires are vigorous they exert expansionary 
pressure on the ethnic groups inhabiting the hinterland. When empires are 
weak, they tempt border tribes with rich booty. In either case, "barbarians" 
living on the imperial frontier have an added stimulus to generate a better 
capacity for collective action.

• Another kind of situation that should also be conducive to asabiya increase 
is the frontier between two large empires that espouse different exclusionary religions (for example, Christianity and Islam). In this case, it is the 
groups inhabiting the frontier regions of the empires that are under pressure 
to increase and scale up their asabiyas.

• Metaethnic frontiers are zones where groups come under enormous pressure, and where ethnocide, culturicide, and genocide, but also ethnogenesis, 
commonly occur. Intense intergroup competition eventually results in one 
group with high asabiya, scaling-up structures, and simple luck emerging as 
a victor. In the process, the group acquires a distinct identity, demarcated 
by a strong ethnic boundary, and a high degree of internal cohesion-in 
other words, it becomes a new ethnic group (an incipient ethnie). Thus, the 
process leading to the formation of this new ethnopolitical system can be 
thought of as ethnogenesis. Note that the theory views polity formation and 
ethnogenesis as two aspects of the same dynamic process.

• Formalization of this verbal theory into a simple analytical model suggests 
that the dynamics of polity size and asabiya should go through a single 
boom-bust cycle. However, this dynamic occurs only if the extent of the 
frontier zone is small compared to the upper limit on the polity extent imposed by logistic constraints. If this condition is violated, then polity dynamics are not qualitatively different from the simple geopolitical model of 
Section 2.2.1.

• To check on the analytical results, I constructed a spatially explicit simulation of a world-system of polities whose territorial dynamics are driven by 
geopolitical forces and asabiya. Asabiya increases in the frontier regions, and 
declines in central regions. The simulation indicates that for a wide variety 
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 77 
of parameters, polities go though repeated boom-bust oscillations. However, 
these oscillations are not cyclic, but highly chaotic.

• One of the key periods in the life of a polity is its beginnings. The asabiya of 
its core ethnie must somehow increase above that of the surrounding ethnic 
groups in order for the focal group to expand. The process that increases 
a group's asabiya and launches it on the polity-building and expansionary 
course is ethnogenesis.

Chapter Five 
An Empirical Test of the Metaethnic Frontier Theory 
5.1 SETI'ING UP THE TEST 
The theory developed in Chapter 4 predicts that large territorial empires should 
originate at metaethnic frontiers. My goal in this chapter is to test this prediction 
empirically. The theory is universal, in the sense that its prediction applies to any 
agrarian polity, anywhere in the world. A test encompassing all known history, 
however, is not feasible given resources currently at my disposal, so it is necessary 
to select a discrete area and period as a first step. I chose to focus on Europe 
during the first two millennia c.E., because the history within these spatiotemporal 
boundaries is reasonably well known (and is easily accessible in Western language 
literature).

