2000) provides yet another confirmation of the original Banfield insight. I should 
also mention the work of Gambetta (1988, 1993:77), who cogently argued that 
the Sicilian mafia can be understood as a response to the lack of trust specifically 
affecting southern Italy, and that the endemic distrust is the crucial difference that 
explains why the mafia did not emerge elsewhere in the Mediterranean world.

COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY 45 
The richness of American civic life was extensively commented on by de 
Tocqueville (1984). Putnam (2000) provides great factual material documenting 
the waxings and wanings of social capital in the United States. He also shows 
that American "rugged individualism" is a myth.

It is interesting that Triandis, in his discussion of the individualism and collectivism of Italians and Americans, cites the same two authors, Banfield and 
de Tocqueville, but comes to the opposite conclusions. This puzzle is resolved 
when we pay attention to the social scale. Triandis focuses on very small groups, 
essentially, family. Indeed, southern Italians are characterized by "tight" families, 
while American families are "loose." Putnam's focus of interest (and ours) is on 
larger-scale societies: regional and national. Thus, I am not trying to say that the 
work of Triandis and other social psychologists is wrong in any way. It is simply 
that their focus on very small-scale groupings makes their results less relevant to 
our concerns.

A Terminological Note 
Collective solidarity, social cohesion, social capital, and asabiya are clearly 
closely related concepts. This raises the question of which term we should use in 
this research program. The problem with "social capital" is that it sounds jarring 
when applied to preindustrial or even prestate societies. Further, "capital" has the 
wrong associations. Capital should be something divisible, but social capital is a 
public good. In general, capital is too much an economic term, while collective 
solidarity is a very sociological concept. Finally, "social capital" is used in the 
sociological literature in at least two very different senses (Lin 2001: Table 1): 
one focused on the individual (Lin 1982; Burt 1992), the other focused on 
the group (Bourdieu 1980; Putnam et al. 1993). These are two very different 
notions. Contrast, for example, the "group-focused" definition of Putnam, given 
above, with the "individual-focused" one due to Lin (2001): social capital is 
"investment in social relations by individuals through which they gain access to 
embedded resources to enhance expected returns of instrumental or expressive 
actions." In light of the discussion in Section 3.1.2, these two kinds of social 
capital may actually act antagonistically: group-level capacity for action may 
occur at the expense of some individual interests, while individuals manipulating 
social networks for their advantage can harm group-level performance.

Collective solidarity and social cohesion also have some undesirable aspects.

There is too much emphasis on interpersonal connection, rather than group-level 
emergent property. Thus, I decided to settle on asabiya as the term for the central 
concept in the theory that is developed: the group's capacity for collective action.

Note the explicit reference to the group here: it does not make sense to speak 
of asabiya in general, or of the asabiya of a person (by contrast, one can speak 
of the solidarity that an individual may feel toward a group). The main kind of 
collective action we are interested in is coercive power: the ability of a group to 
defend itself and its resources (such as territory), as well as to extend its sway 
over other groups and their resources.

The usage of the term asabiya has several advantages. The most important 
reason is that it has very little theoretical baggage, because (unfortunately) few 
people are familiar with lbn Khaldun's writings. Second, I would like to explicitly 
acknowledge the contribution of lbn Khaldun's thinking to the theory of historical dynamics by using his terminology (and if we ever get to the point where we 
can actually quantify asabiya, I suggest that we do it in khalduns ). lbn Khaldun, 
of course, knew only a small subset of agrarian societies, and since we want to 
generalize asabiya to all agrarian polities, we had to stretch his concept considerably. As Gellner (1981), Lapidus (1990), and Barfie1d (1990) pointed out, lbn 
Khaldun theorized how asabiya increased or decreased in small- and mediumscale societies. The specific historical cases that he discussed were the origins 
of regional states, rather than large territorial empires. In the historical dynamics 
research program, we want to generalize the notion of asabiya to apply to all 
kinds of agrarian polities.

Incidentally, there is a very interesting empirical pattern of medieval and modem Middle Eastern history: the deserts of North Africa and Arabia, and the mountainous zones throughout the whole region, which were inhabited by Bedouin nomads and sedentary tribes of the Berbers, Kurds, and Pashtuns, were divided into 
small regional states. By contrast, the Iranian and Anatolian plateau zones were 
generally under the control of great empires, which were inhabited by tribes organized into large confederations of Turco-Mongolian descent (Barfield 1990:157).

This observation raises two questions: how did Turco-Mongolian polities manage 
to generate and maintain asabiya at such a large scale? And why do Arabian 
and Turco-Mongolian asabiyas exhibit this systematic difference throughout the 
period of many centuries? An attempt at answering these questions is made in 
Chapter 4.

Implications for the Research Program 
Since my main focus is on preindustrial societies, I will restrict the term asabiya 
(the capacity of a group for collective action) to agrarian and extractive societies.

If social capital is a closely related concept to asabiya, as I would argue, although 
one developed for industrial societies, then we can greatly benefit from theoretical 
and empirical research on this topic. The first important aspect of social capital 
is that political scientists have developed methods for measuring it. Measures 
can be made on both the individual and group levels. At the individual level, 
Putnam and eo-workers quantify the density of networks within which people 
are embedded, the quality of interactions (cooperation, reciprocity), and mutual 
trust. At the level of societies, Putnam and eo-workers have addressed institutional 
effectiveness, such as in the Italian example referred to above. Other theorists have 
connected the level of social trust to economic performance (Fukuyama 1995). If 
social capital is measurable, then by implication its equivalent for preindustrial 
societies, asabiya, may be measurable too.

As I argued throughout this chapter, one of the most important determinants 
of asabiya is the capacity of individuals to behave solidaristically, that is, to 
sacrifice individual advantage for the sake of the common good (however, this is 
COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY 47 
not the only dimension of asabiya; for example, the capacity to self-organize, as 
in choosing and then obeying leaders, can also affect the capacity for collective 
