at the expense of states surrounded by enemies (Collins 1995:1555). However, 
state expansion reduces the marchland advantage, as the state expands away from 
its initially more protected position.

We now translate this theory into formal models, starting with the loop involving geopolitical resources, and then adding the effect of logistical loads.

Marchland position requires a spatially explicit approach and will be tackled in 
the next section. In developing the following models, I will make two general 
assumptions. First, and most importantly, I will assume that various feedbacks 
act rapidly with respect to territorial dynamics. Thus, I can use ordinary differential equations as the mathematical framework. Second, to make the model more 
concrete I will assume simple functional forms, usually linear ones. The effect of 
these assumptions on the results will be discussed below.

In the first model, there are three variables: territory size, or area A, geopolitical resources R, and war success W. I will assume that the rate of change of A 
is linearly related to war success: A= c1 W, where c1 is a proportionality constant, translating war victory into square kilometers of territory gained. Resources 
should be roughly proportional to the area (in the simplest case, if population density is approximately constant, increased area implies greater population base to 
pay taxes and provide recruits). Thus, R = c2A. Finally, the relationship between 
resources and war success is a bit more complex. Resources translate into state 
power, but in order to gain victory, state power has to be greater than the power 
of the adversary. Assuming that the state we study (the focal state) exists in a 
homogeneous environment, characterized by a constant military power of rivals, 
we have W = c3R- c4 • The constant c3 translates resources into power, while c4 
is the power of the adversary who must be defeated. The greater is the power 
of the focal state, in relation to the adversary power, the more successful it is 
in war, and, in consequence, the faster it increases its territory. Putting together 
these assumptions, and after some algebraic manipulations, we have the following 
model: 
A=cA-a (2.10) 
where I defined c = c1c2c3 and a= c1c4 , to gid rid of unneeded parameter combinations.

The dynamics of this linear model are very simple, and depend on the initial 
territory of the state (see Figure 2.3a). If the initial A is below the threshold 
A0 = afc, then the rate of change is negative, and A decreases to 0. However, if 
A starts above the threshold, then it grows exponentially (that is, at an accelerating 
rate) to infinity. In other words, we are dealing here with a zero-order type of 
(a) 
Territory 
Figure 2.3 Relationship between the rate of territorial change, A, and territory, A, in the 
two simple geopolitical models. (a) Model of territory size effects. (b) Model of territory 
size and distance.

dynamics. This is not at all surprising, because all arrows in the loop we modeled 
so far have pluses associated with them. In other words, we have just modeled a 
positive feedback loop, and obtained an entirely predictable result.

The loop involving logistic loads, on the other hand, involves one minus, and 
therefore it is a negative feedback loop. To model the effect of logistic load, let 
us follow Collins and assume that imperial overextension results from difficulties 
associated with projecting imperial power over distance. In other words, if state 
power at the center is P0 , then at distance r it is P0L(r), where L(r) is the logistic 
distance multiplier, ranging from I at r = 0 to 0 at r = oo. Boulding (1962:245-
247) presents the argument that logistic distance multipliers should decline with 
increasing r as a negative exponential function: L(r) =exp[-rfc5], with c5 governing how rapidly power declines with distance. Since the relationship between 
area and radius is A"' r2 , the logistic distance multiplier is L(r) = exp[ -.JA/c7].

Substituting this relationship in the model, we have 
A= cAexp(-JA/h]-a (2.11) 
where parameter combinations were again replaced with single parameters. Figure 2.3b shows that state power, as measured by its ability to expand, is negative 
at low A Gust as in the pure size model), and initially increases with A. However, eventually the effect of increased logistic load begins to be felt. At A = 4h2 
state power is maximized, and for A > 4h2 it begins to decline. There are two 
equilibrial points, A 1 and A2• A 1, similarly to A0 in the size-only model, is unstable: if the initial condition is below A 1, then the state is eaten by its neighhors. A2 is a stable equilibrium: below it, the state's ability to expand is positive 
and A increases; above it, the state expansion rate is negative and A declines 
(Figure 2.3b ).

GEOPOLITICS 19 
An alternative formulation is to assume that power declines with increasing 
distance as a Gaussian curve, c5 exp[-r2fc6]. The Gaussian curve appears convenient as a phenomenological description, because it is flat near the state center, 
where communications are best, and then declines at an increasing rate. Employing this assumption leads to a slightly different model: A = eA exp[-A/ b] -a.

The relationship between A and A in this model has the same qualitative shape as 
in Figure 2.3b, so the implications for territorial dynamics are exactly the same 
as in Model (2.11).

Note that in this model imperial overstretch does not lead to state collapse.

Comparing the size-only model to Model (2.11 ), we see that the novel feature is 
the existence of the upper equilibrium A2 , which turns out to be stable. Thus, we 
now have a model of first-order dynamics; there is no possibility of boom/bust 
behaviors. How general is this result? Remember that we made two kinds of 
assumptions: fast feedbacks and simple functional forms. Taking the second assumption first, here is where our knowledge of dynamics (Section 2.1) begins to 
pay for itself. No matter how nonlinear the various functional forms are, we will 
still end up with a one-dimensional ordinary differential equation model, which 
is not capable of generating boom/bust dynamics and second-order oscillations.

All we are likely to do is to create a few more equilibrial points, making the dynamics increasingly more metastable. If we add large enough amounts of noise, 
then we may be able to force the state trajectory to jump between a high and 
a low equilibrium. This would not be a terribly satisfactory model, because we 
then would have to understand just what were the exogenous forces that forced 
the trajectory from one basin of attraction to another. We would need to model 
these exogenous forces explicitly, and end up with a very different kind of theory 
from the one we are examining here.

The assumption of fast feedbacks is more crucial to the general theoretical 
results implied by Model (2.11). Clearly, adding delays, whether implicitly by 
using difference equations, or explicitly by making some variables, other than 
A, change on a slow time scale, will lead to models that are capable of oscillations. Let us consider whether adding such delays makes sense empirically. The 
historical record shows that the growth of empires occurs over time periods of 
many decades, and even centuries. Thus, A is a slow variable. The geopolitical 
resources may also come on line with some time lag (because it takes time to 
"digest" new conquests). However, R is involved in the positive feedback loop, 
