10.1.3 Demographic-Structural Theory 
The last theory for which I attempted to travel all the way from verbal beginnings to empirical tests is the demographic-structural theory (Chapter 7). This 
theory has already been well developed and tested by Goldstone and others, 
which greatly simplified my treatment of it. However, the Goldstonian version of 
the theory treats population dynamics as an exogenous variable, while I wished 
to examine the hypothesis that it is actually dynamically linked to state breakdown. I hypothesized that political instability has a negative effect on population 
growth. Translating this hypothesis into models, I found that somewhat irregular 
cycles of 2-3 centuries in duration are predicted for agrarian polities. Irregularity 
arises (in the simple model) as a result of variable periods of time passing from 
state collapse to the beginning of the next demographic-structural cycle.

The empirical survey of available long-term data on population dynamics suggests that oscillations of 2-3 centuries in period are the rule rather than an exception (Chapter 8). Furthermore, building on previous work by Chu and Lee, I 
analyzed a data set containing estimates of both population dynamics and political 
instability in China from -200 to 1710. The results of this analysis suggest very 
strongly that population and instability are endogenously linked to each other.

Qualitative surveys, one by Fischer for the whole of western Europe, and my 
more focused one on France and Russia, also support this view (further support 
for the theory comes from recent work by Sergey Nefedov).

The theory also predicts faster cycles for nomadic imperial confederations, with 
periods of about a century. Although the nomadic polities are not a primary focus 
in this book, a brief excursion into the post-Chinggis Khan history of Central Asia 
(Section 9.2.2) provided some supporting evidence for such dynamics.

10.1.4 Geopolitics 
One theory that I was unable to subject to a thorough empirical test is the theory of geopolitics (Chapter 2). However, it was still possible to make a lot of 
progress just on the strength of translating the verbal theory into mathematical models. Thus, we found that the mechanisms postulated, for example, by the 
Collins version of the theory-geopolitical resources, logistical loads, and marchland advantage-led to first-order dynamics. In other words, the theory cannot 
explain prolonged declines that characterize many historical empires. This purely 
theoretical development illustrates one of the strengths of mathematical, as opposed to verbal, models. What may look reasonable when the problem is stated 
verbally does not necessarily have the proposed dynamical consequences when 
we formalize the description in the language of dynamical systems. Nonlinearities and lags affecting historical (and physical, and biological) systems require a 
specialized mathematical apparatus for connecting assumptions to predictions.

One empirical application of the geopolitical theory, although limited, was my 
test of the effect of positional advantage of a region on the maximum polity size 
originating from it. I found no statistical association between the two variables, 
suggesting that marchland position confers no fixed geopolitical advantage. This 
is not to say, however, that marchland position may not confer a temporary advantage. In fact, there are many convincing examples of states losing wars that 
they fought on two fronts, such as Germany in the two world wars. However, this 
idea remains to be rigorously tested. We need to go beyond anecdotal approaches: 
after all, Prussia during the Seven Years War was also fighting on multiple fronts, 
yet it triumphed. The empirical development of geopolitics is another area where 
further research is needed. An objective test that would address all military interactions within a defined area and period of time would be most satisfying, 
because it would avoid any conscious or unconscious selection of cases. However, developing a set of worked examples would be a very useful first step in 
this direction, like the example I suggested in Chapter 9 on the sixteenth-century 
struggle for Italy between France and Spain.

10.2 COMBINING DIFFERENT MECHANISMS INTO AN 
INTEGRATED WHOLE 
Although it can be argued that useful advances have been made in all theories 
(apart from, perhaps, geopolitics) separately, it is not completely clear how to 
develop an approach that would integrate them. Tracing how different mechanisms may have interacted in specific polities (Chapter 9), however, suggests 
some hypotheses that can be developed in future work. Here I describe my current thinking about this problem (with the caveat that this is hypothesis building, 
so all of the following is subject to change in the light of new models and data).

One of the most useful aspects of the dynamical-systems approach is that it 
forces us to worry explicitly about the temporal scale on which a certain mechanism is operating. The initial discussion of temporal scales can be found in 
Section 8.2, and here I can refine it in the light of empirical developments that 
occurred after that section. One "natural" time scale of high relevance to historical dynamics is the human generation time (20-30 years). This is the scale at 
which population increases and declines, political elites are renewed, and culture 
is transmitted and modified. A much smaller scale of years is where "ecological" mechanisms operate: the agricultural cycle, outbreaks of disease, etc. The 
scale at which asabiya, ethnokinetic, and demographic-structural mechanisms operate is much longer than years, or even generations. The secular wave has the 
best defined period: it is around 2-3 centuries (in agrarian empires), or an order 
of magnitude longer than the human generation. Such a large·, tenfold, difference 
means that generation cycles will be nested within demographic-structural cycles, 
and the two will not interact strongly (at least, this is the working hypothesis, 
CONCLUSION 201 
which should be tested). Thus, any disequilibria in the age structure, such as 
baby booms, should proceed largely independently of the longer secular cycles.

Another type of shorter-period dynamics is the two-generation cycles with period 
of about 40-60 years. Possible examples include Kondratieff's waves, Easterlin's 
cycles, the long waves of Goldstein (1988), and the fathers-and-sons oscillations 
during decentralization phases, noticed in Chapter 9. It is interesting to note, in 
this respect, that long price time series, such as the one shown in Figure 7. 7, 
apparently have two dominant periods: around 300 years, corresponding to the 
secular oscillation, and around 50 years, perhaps reflecting some bigenerational 
cycle. The two cycles appear to be simply superimposed on each other (although 
the 50-year cycle may have a greater amplitude during the period of political 
instability). Even shorter cycles, such as the 11-year sunspot oscillation may be 
superimposed on top of the longer ones. So it may be appropriate to think about 
historical dynamics as a set of cycles of different periods nested within each 
other.

Now let us consider longer-term dynamics, and in particular the relationship 
between secular waves and the pace of an assimilation process or asabiya change.

Using the estimated rate parameters for religious conversion (Table 6.1), I estimate that the time needed for passing from 10% to 90% of the population converted is between 150 and 300 years. In other words, assimilation appears to 
occur on roughly the same temporal scale as the secular cycle.

By contrast, the dynamics of asabiya occur on a much longer scale (in fact, 
discovering just how slow this process is was one of the most interesting empirical 
findings of Chapter 5). Looking at large territorial empires of greater than 0.5 
Mm2 at the peak (the "Great Powers"), we observe that the duration of metaethnic 
frontiers in their regions of origin was from three to ten centuries. Thus, one 
secular wave is the minimum period of asabiya incubation, and usually two or 
three such periods have to pass before a new aggressive polity/ethnie is born. The 
temporal extents of successful empires are similarly long. In fact, we can measure 
