(self-awareness), which is reflected in their ethnonym (Bromley 1987:14).

Of particular importance to our purposes here is the system-like nature of the 
ethnos concept. Thus, just as systems consist of subsystems, and themselves are 
part of a metasystem, ethnic groups of different scale, or hierarchical level, can 
be referred to as subethnos, ethnos, and metaethnos. Where we need more levels, 
we can always add categories like subsubethnos. In principle, we can designate 
any arbitrary level as "ethnos" and define other levels in terms of sub- and metaprefixes. In practice, however, ethnos is typically used for that level of ethnic 
groups that roughly corresponds to modem nations. People belonging to different ethnoses tend to speak mutually unintelligible languages. Thus, Americans, 
French, Germans, Russians, and Egyptians are all different ethnoses. Examples 
of subethnoses are Mormons and Southerners ("Rebs") in the United States, and 
Bavarians, Saxons, and Schwabs in Germany. Different subethnoses within the 
same ethnos are often characterized by distinct speech dialects.

Metaethnic identity often arises as a result of past or present association within 
the same large state (or, rather, empire). Thus, Latin Christians of Medieval Europe were primarily inhabitants of successor states of the Carolingian empire 
(Bartlett 1993). Today, the inheritor of Latin Christendom is the European identity, based primarily on membership in the European Community (accordingly, 
Germans or French do not consider, for example, Belorussians as "fellow Europeans,'' even though Belarus is geographically a European country). Another 
important source of metaethnic identity is religion. Thus, an Egyptian is also an 
Arab, a Sunni Muslim, and, finally, a Muslim (so we need several metas to designate these identities). I hope that the advantage of viewing ethnicity as a systemic 
property is apparent from the preceding discussion: it prevents us from arguing 
about whether Arabs are an ethnos, a metaethnos, or something else.

Ethnos-based terminology also avoids arguments about whether there were nations before nationalism or not. Thus, an Athenian of the classic period was also 
an Ionian, and a Hellene. We know that ancient Greeks had a hierarchical sense 
of ethnicity, since they had two separate words to designate alloethnics: foreigners (xenoi) which was used for other Hellenes, and "barbarians" (barbaroi) which 
was used for non-Hellenes, even for members of other highly developed civilizations, such as the Persians. The Greeks also keenly felt such intermediate-level 
ethnic boundaries as the one between Dorians (to whom Spartans belonged) and 
Ionians (which included Athenians) (Smith 1986).

To . sum up, ethnicity, in the broad sense that I use here, may range from 
solidarity felt toward a small circle of relatives, friends, and neighbors, at one 
end of the spectrum, to solidarity felt toward millions belonging to the same 
nation or even a supranational entity, at the other end of the spectrum. However, 
it must be stressed that the strength of collective solidarity usually varies with the 
scale of ethnic group. Thus, it is quite possible that solidarity may be very high at 
the subethnic level, and quite low at the next level up. A somewhat extreme but 
not unusual example is the situation in the France of the late sixteenth century, 
when Huguenots and Catholics engaged in an extremely brutal conflict. By this 
point in French history, Huguenot strongholds were primarily found in the south 
and southwest of France, while the Catholic League was strong in the north 
and east (Briggs 1998), so in this example regional and religious identities were 
tightly intertwined. This example also illustrates the dynamic nature of solidarity.

Just a generation or two before, the French nobility was quite solidaristic in its 
struggle against the Habsburg hegemony, and many nobles fighting on opposite 
sides in the wars of religion were comrades in arms during the Spanish Wars (or 
their fathers were).

3.1.5 Ethnies 
The second term, ethnie, was imported by Anthony Smith (1986) from the French.

He defined ethnie as a named human population with myths of common ancestry, 
shared historical memories, one or more elements of shared culture, a link with a 
homeland, and a measure of solidarity, at least among the elites (Smith 2000:65).

In my view, this definition is quite similar to Bromley's definition of ethnos, 
although the emphases, to be sure, differ (Bromley seems to put more stress 
on objective cultural characteristics). In any case, it is not important to resolve 
these definitional matters for the purposes of this book. Because of its current 
prevalence in the English literature, I will adopt Smith's term ethnie, but I will 
also employ the suffixes sub and meta for smaller- or larger-scale ethnic groups.

One aspect of Smith's theory that I find particularly useful is his analysis of 
interrelations between ethnicity and class (Smith 1986: Chapter 4). Smith distinguished two types of ethnies. The first is lateral or aristocratic ethnie, in which 
the sense of common ethnicity is largely confined to elites (nobles, clerics, and 
wealthier merchants). The second type is vertical or demotic ethnie, characterized by a much greater degree of "social penetration" of shared ethnic feeling.

The important point is that lower strata of an ethnie can have a variable sense of 
solidarity with the elites. At one extreme are tightly vertically integrated ethnies 
like certain tribal confederations (e.g., Mongols under Chinggis Khan) and some 
city-states in ancient Sumer or classical Greece. At the other extreme are polities 
in which the elites are ethnically distinct from subjugated commoners ( e.g, the 
Old Hittite Kingdom). Thus, the strength of collective solidarity can vary not only 
with the scale of the ethnic group (Section 3.1.4), but also with the socioeconomic 
stratum.

3.2 COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY AND WSTORICAL DYNAMICS 
As I stated at the beginning of this chapter, before we can understand polity dynamics we first need to analyze how various groups of people interact within a 
polity. There are two aspects of human behavior that make groups particularly 
COLLEGIVE SOLIDARITY 37 
effective agents in their own right: boundary demarcation and group-directed (altruistic or solidaristic) behaviors. As agents, groups can interact with other groups, 
and the interactions are often conflictual: "the best-organized group usually wins, 
and that means the group with the most internal solidarity" (Collins 1992:26; see 
also Richerson and Boyd 1998). Can we use this insight to help us understand 
why some states are more successful than others? 
Respectable theories in historical sociology tend to avoid the subject of collective solidarity, and instead focus on coercion and economic relations, which of 
course are the bread and meat of the rational choice theory. One example of this 
bias is the (in other ways excellent) book by Tilly (1990), in which "coercion" 
and "capital" are actually the first words in the title. The impression that one gets 
from the professional literature is that war and economics are somehow "hard" 
subjects, while solidarity is "soft" and unscientific. The reason is probably due 
to the failure of earlier macrohistorians (Vico, Danilevsky, Spengler, Toynbee, 
Sorokin) to develop scientific theories, that is, theories that make nonobvious 
predictions that can be empirically tested. Quigley (1961:129) calls such historical explanations "softening of the fiber'' theories. Tainter (1988:89-90) similarly 
dismisses them as "mystical explanations" that are "crippled by reliance on a 
biological growth analogy, by value judgments, and by explanation by reference 
to intangibles." 
But what if "softening of the fiber'' refers not to the moral degradation of individuals in declining empires, but rather to the loss of collective solidarity by these 
societies? In order to build a scientific theory of collective solidarity, we need to 
