the mid-nineteenth as was the case for central and western Europe.

We can look for explanations in purely exogenous factors, such as climate fluctuations (Galloway 1986; Goldstone 199lb). Thus, it is possible that the pllgue 
pandemic of the fourteenth century (itself a consequence of the Mongolian superempire) "reset" a number of polities to the same starting conditions. Another 
possibility is some "contagion" leading to positive spatial autocorrelations. For 
example, almost synchronous uprisings in Portugal, Catalonia, and Sicily could 
happen because the revolt in one region could encourage others to do the same.

Similarly, it is known that the wave of European revolutions in 1848 fed on 
news from other parts of the continent. The third possibility is suggested by the 
dynamical systems theory.

If two oscillatory systems are driven by the same mechanism, causing them 
to cycle with the same period, then they may oscillate in synchrony by chance 
alone, simply because they happened to get started at approximately the same 
time (Turchin and Hall 2003). If that is the case, then differences in phase will 
tend to be perpetuated in time. For example, it happened that France came out 
of the fourteenth-century crisis before England. Whereas France was already on 
the ascendant by 1450, England had yet to experience the last bout of its own 
state collapse, the Wars of the Roses ( 1455-1485). This may have delayed the English demographic-structural cycle by roughly half a century, compared to France.

CASE STUDIES 183 
Thus, we would expect that the next period of England's state breakdown should 
begin after that of France. This is what apparently happened: France was in a fullblown crisis by 1590, while England's turn came only in 1640. Of course, there 
is another possible explanation for this shift in phase. The demographic-structural 
theory predicts only how pressures for crisis evolve. The actual beginning of the 
crisis needs a triggering event, which may come sooner or later. For example, 
in agrarian monarchies, the triggering event is often a disputed succession. Thus, 
two polities under identical amounts of pressure may go into crisis 10 years apart, 
depending on when their respective monarchs die. In the early modem French and 
English cases, however, it seems that there was a genuine difference in pressure 
for crisis. Food prices are a particularly good indicator of fiscal pressure, and note 
how food prices in France started increasing prior to those for England (Figure 
9.3). French prices reached a peak in 1590 (and a second one during 1620-1640).

In contrast, in England food prices reached a peak only in 1640. These data, thus, 
suggest that France and England were genuinely shifted in phase. Note that during the next episode of political instability, it was France again that led the way 
with the French Revolution. By contrast, England's period of political crisis was 
acute (but did not cause state breakdown; Goldstone 1991 b) during the 1830s.

The considerations discussed above are suggestive, but no more than that. However, it is clear that meaningful empirical tests can be devised to distinguish between the three different explanations of apparent synchrony (as well as persistent 
phase shifts). Furthermore, in reality all three kinds of mechanisms (exogenous, 
endogenous, and spatial autocorrelations) may contribute to the observed pattern 
of synchrony (Turchin and Hall 2003). For example, an exogenous force may 
interact with the inherent tendency of the dynamical system to oscillate with a 
certain period to produce synchronous oscillations in different polities. One possibility, a strong exogenous shock delivered to all systems at the same time (the 
Black Death pandemic), was already mentioned above. Another, more subtle, 
mechanism is when slight changes in climate affect the carrying capacity of populations. Numerical exercises show that correlated changes in carrying capacity, 
even when quite small (e.g., 10-20%), may synchronize the dynamics of two 
polities driven by the selfish elite model.

Fine Structure of Decentralization Phases 
Another interesting pattern apparent in the French case is that decentralization 
phases are not uniformly awful, but have their own rhythms. Thus, the Hundred 
Years War had two periods of particularly acute crisis (c.l360 and the 1420s), 
separated roughly by half a century. During the next decentralization phase, there 
were again two peaks of political instability, in the 1590s and c.1650. The most 
acute crisis of the French Revolution was around 1790, after which the internal situation was reasonably stable under Napoleon and the Bourbons. After this 
respite, another period of instability followed with the revolutions of 1830 and 
1848. It is hard to say whether this is just a coincidence, or whether some regular pattern is involved. If real, one possible explanation of such oscillations 
may be that after a prolonged period of instability, e.g., a decade, people begin 
to yearn for stability. Even if the basic conditions that brought about the crisis 
in the first place have not been resolved, people may acquiesce in any political arrangement that restores order. Thus, the generation that grew up during 
the time of trouble is likely to support order at any cost, even if the regime is 
perceived as lacking in legitimacy. The next generation, however, does not have 
direct experience with turmoil and therefore is easier to persuade to support an 
overturning of the existing order. Such a dynamic should result in two-generation 
cycles of 40-60 years in duration. Furthermore, it is possible that some mechanism similar to that described by Richard Easterlin (1980) may be operating.

Heightened sociopolitical instability depresses birth rates, resulting in a smaller 
cohort and, consequently, less competition among the next generation. The next 
generation, therefore, does well economically, has a lower mobilization potential, 
but also produces a large number of babies. Such a mechanism should lead to an 
alternation of smalVdocile versus large/belligerent generations. The two possible 
explanations, discussed above, are not alternatives, but can work together. Additionally, there could be some interesting implications here for the connection 
between Kondratieff waves and warfare (Goldstein 1988), and some recent literature from the world-systems research program (Modelski and Thompson 1996).

9.1.3 Summary 
Counting the centuries of sociopolitical instability and population decline (which 
are more easily detected in the historical record), we observe the following sequence for Gaul-France: ID-VI-IX-XIV-XVII-XIX, or six oscillations during 
the 2000-year period. All oscillations but one are of 2-3 centuries in duration.

The only exception is the X-XIV period, which as I argued above is an intercycle.

Thus, the periods of the secular waves conform well with those predicted by the 
demographic-structural theory. Additionally, although we lack quantitative data, 
such as J. S. Lee developed for China, we have traced the qualitative dynamics 
in this region, and they appear to be in line with the theoretical predictions.

9.2 RUSSIA 
9.2.1 The Frontier Origins 
On the Great Steppe Frontier of Europe 
The importance of the steppe frontier in Russian history has been pointed 
out by numerous historians (Presniak.ov 1918; McNeill 1964; Kargalov 1974; 
Wieszynnski 1976; Armstrong 1982; LeDonne 1997; Khodarkovsky 2002). In 
1992, a whole issue of Russian History was devoted to this topic (see Hellie 
1992 and following articles).

The great grasslands dominate the interior of the Eurasian continent. The 
Eurasian steppe runs practically uninterrupted from Khingan Mountains in the 
