demarcated by a strong ethnic boundary, and a high degree of internal cohesionin other words, this is a new subethnie (or small ethnie ), and the preceding history 
can be thought of as its ethnogenesis. (Thus, ethnogenesis is not a single point in 
time, but a historical process that can take many generations and even centuries.) 
As the new subethnie grows (both numerically and in the territory it controls), 
it assimilates other ethnically similar groups nearby, by either voluntary or (initially) coercive mechanisms. The ethnic boundary is expanded to encompass these 
groups, melding them into a single ethnie (although subethnic divisions may persist, it is important that the asabiya is high at the level of the whole ethnie ). The 
positive feedback dynamic sets in, so that increased size enhances the ability of 
the ethnie to consolidate an area around it into a territorial polity. The new polity 
grows by conquest, first by consolidating ethnically similar groups, then at the 
expense of the rest of the old empire and the tribal zone. Eventually a new empire 
is created and expands to the limits set by geopolitical constraints. In the process, 
the ethnic group transforms itself into the imperial core group.

The new empire is initially governed by highly solidaristic elites and is successful in maintaining internal peace (all warfare is transferred to the frontiers).

As a result, population density in the center increases to the limit set by the 
subsistence technology. Asabiya in the empire's center begins to decline, as a 
result of its inhabitants not being exposed to external threats, and as a result of 
increased internal competition. This process probably takes a long time (many 
generations, and perhaps even centuries). Meanwhile, a similarly slow process 
causes another round of ethnogenesis to occur in the frontier zone. Eventually a 
new ethnie (or, more likely, several ethnies) is born, bringing an end to the old 
empire, and the cycle starts again.

4.1.3 Scaling-up Structures 
An important element of the theory is the ability of ethnic groups to scale up 
without splintering into subgroups. While the common general mechanism, as I 
postulated, is location near a metaethnic fault line, specific cultural structures that 
enable asabiya to scale up vary. Here I discuss three examples of such structures.

Religion 
One of the most powerful mechanisms for the scaling up of asabiya is a religion 
that is (1) proselytizing and (2) exclusionary. The first property allows an expanding ethnic group, professing the religion, to increase its size by adding converts.

The second property, exclusivity (Stark 1996), maintains a sharp boundary between the in-group and out-group: "who is not with us is against us." 
The archetypal examples of proselytizing exclusionary religions are Christianity and Islam. Both religions, especially during their early periods, placed a big 
emphasis on the community of the faithful as opposed to the unbelievers. For 
example, within the Islamic community, or umma, Muslims were expected to behave to each other altruistically (thus, one of the emphases was on charity). The 
Muslim world (Dar al-Islam) was in opposition to the non-Muslims (Dar al-Harb, 
literally "the House of War''), and Muslims were certainly not expected to behave 
altruistically toward the nonbelievers: whereas enslaving Muslims was forbidden, 
no such injunction existed against enslaving the infidels.

If we interpret the characteristics of such religions as Islam and Christianity in 
terms of group selection theory, we see that they correspond very well to features 
that promote selection at the group level: 
• Sharp boundary between in-group and out-group 
• Leveling institutions (charity; monogamy in Christianity) 
• Strong norms and metanorms (enforcement of norms) 
• Altruistic in-group behavior 
Stark ( 1996) provides a sociological analysis of early Christianity, with an emphasis on its features that explain its spectacular rise.

Primogeniture 
An example of a political structure that increases group cohesion is the institution of rulership, in which one group member becomes a symbolic focus for the 
whole group. An example of a small-scale group of this kind is a warband with 
its military leader. Many large empires started in this way; for example, the Ostrogoths (Bums 1984). However, the success of such groups is typically limited 
in time and space, and they must evolve certain structures that will allow them 
to overcome their scaling-up limitations. Extension of the temporal duration is 
achieved by the cultural mechanism of dynasty. Some dynasties exerted an extremely powerful influence over very long periods of time, such as Chinggisids 
and Sharifs (descendants of Muhammad). But the greatest danger to empires established by tribal conquest typically was the division of the acquired territory 
among the multiple heirs. One cultural mechanism that prevented the splintering 
of the realm was the rule of primogeniture.

It is interesting that history knows several cultural innovations that attempted 
to prevent empire splintering, although they did not work as well as primogeniture. For example, during the Kievan period, Russian princes evolved an elaborate 
mechanism by which the overall ruler (the Grand Prince) was succeeded by his 
younger brother, who would move up to the main capital of Kiev, thereby freeing 
a subordinate capital, which would be occupied by the next member of the hierarchy, and so on. This system, however, did not work very well, and quickly led to 
a collapse into a feudal situation of multiple principalities, each governed by its 
own dynasty. However, the process did not stop there. The practice of assigning 
each heir his allotment lead to the progressive splintering of Russian principalities. Only when one of them, Moscow, adopted the rule of primogeniture, could 
the trend toward disintegration be reversed.

THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 59 
Society-Wide Mechanisms of Male Socialization 
In a cross-cultural study of warfare, Otterbein (1985) demonstrated that societies 
engaged in internal warfare (conflict among small-level groups) were dominated 
by small-scale "fraternal interest" groups composed of related males. Societies 
that emphasized socialization of males into military institutions that crosscut 
units of male relatedness, by contrast, were able to suppress internal warfare.

Such societies were much more successful in external warfare (conflict among 
larger-scale groups). Examples of such cultural innovations include age sets and 
police societies among prestate people (Otterbein 1985), militia drilling in Greek 
city-states and seventeenth-century Europe (McNeill 1982:131), and obligatory 
nationwide military service in modem national states.

4.1.4 Placing the Metaethnic Frontier Theory in Context 
The argument of the previous section has several intersecting points with theories previously advanced in sociology and history. I will not attempt a complete 
literature review here; my plan rather is to provide the context for the metaethnic 
frontier theory, and to highlight some of the similarities to, as well as dissimilarities from, the thinking of previous authors.

Ibn Khaldun 's Theory 
The basic premises from which I advanced the frontier model of ethnogenesis are 
very different from those of Ibn Khaldun, and it is not surprising that the mechanism I propose differs substantially from his. However, there are also some points 
of similarity. In fact, I believe that Ibn Khaldun's theory is largely a subset of the 
frontier model. (Here I focus on Ibn Khaldun's theory for the origin of dynasties; 
his theory dealing with the state collapse will be dealt with in Chapter 7.) 
In Ibn Khaldun's theory for political cycles in the Maghreb, there are two 
ethnic groups, civilized Arabs living along the Mediterranean littoral, and desert 
