correlated with population change. The population decline and political fragmentation were accompanied by increased incidence of internal warfare and external invasions, of which the most significant for northern France was the Viking 
incursion.

The Capetian Wave 
The period of political fragmentation following the collapse of the Carolingians 
was particularly long. As I discussed in the previous section, three particularly 
aggressive challenger politieslprotoethnies arose on the Frankish march in NFR: 
Normans, Angevins, and Capetians. Although their origins were highly mixed, 
by the eleventh century the ethnic boundaries separating the Norman, Angevin, 
and Capetian elites were quite blurred (Bates 1995), and there was a considerable 
degree of intermariage and movement across them. Thus, it was very likely that 
one polity would incorporate the others, and forge first the elites and then the 
general populace into a single ethnie. This is what happened, although things 
were complicated by the Norman conquest of England. During the twelfth century 
it looked as if the successful polity would be the Angevins, but eventually the 
Capetians triumphed.

However, the reason for the anomalously long stretch of time between the 
population peaks of 800 and 1300 c.E. is now apparent-the tenth through twelfth 
centuries were an intercycle period. The centralization phase of the secular cycle 
could not get going until there was a unified polity of substantial size. As matters 
stood, France acquired a strong monarchy only by about 1200 c.E. Population 
growth began prior to this event and continued strongly throughout the thirteenth 
century. By 1300 c.E., France (as well as most of western Europe) was crammed 
with people. During the first half of the fourteenth century, population growth 
completely ceased, and signs of decline became visible, even before the 1348 
epidemic of bubonic plague. This was the time of frequent subsistence crises and 
an onset of internal warfare. The Hundred Years War is portrayed in textbooks as 
a dynastic conflict between French and English kings. In reality, this war was a 
period of great political instability within France (Salmon 1976; Braudel 1988).

The main conflict was that between the great seigneurs of France, the dukes, and 
the counts, of whom the King of England was just one.

CASE STUDIES 179 
The Valois Wave 
The qualitative population dynamics during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries are well understood, even if we may lack precise quantitative estimates 
(Dupaquier et al. 1988a). The French population (similarly to that in other westem European polities) began declining after 1300 c.E., then experienced a precipitous drop in the Black Death epidemic of 1348, followed by further losses 
as epidemics recurred and fighting in the Hundred Years War intensified. Overall population numbers declined by about one-half (Dupiiquier et al. 1988b:149).

After that, for about a century population numbers fluctuated at a low level, and 
started to increase only during the second half of the fifteenth century. The nature 
of population dynamics can be seen in one particular example, Normandy (Bois 
1984:76). Rural population numbers fluctuated back and forth, with three declines 
(in the mid-fourteenth and the early and mid-fifteenth centuries), interspersed by 
periods of partial recovery. The absolute minimum was achieved around 1460, 
after which the population finally entered an era of sustained increase.

The prolonged "stagnation" of population (actually, fluctuations at a low level) 
during the 1350-1450 period presents a serious challenge to most standard demographic theories. Certainly, the crude version of the Malthusian-Ricardian theory 
predicts that populations should have started growing by the end of the fourteenth 
century, not a century later (Brenner 1985). After all, land was plentiful, and large 
amounts of surplus could again be generated (and they apparently were produced, 
judging by the practically universal decline of grain prices, roughly by a factor 
of two from 1300 to 1400 c.E.). The effect of the plague similarly declined and 
reached a minimum (at least, as judged by the number of localities affected; see 
Biraben 1975:120). In fact, the incidence of plague started a slow increase after 
1400 to another peak during the seventeenth century. Thus, some other factor, 
acting with a long delay (a second-order mechanism, in the terminology adopted 
here), was responsible for preventing population increase.

As I argued in Chapter 7, the underlying cause of secular waves in human 
population numbers is the interaction between population and political stability.

According to the demographic-structural theory, then, it was ultimately political 
instability that prevented immediate population increase once the demographic 
pressure was relieved. The situation in France during 1350-1450 appears to support this prediction. The Hundred Years War was a period of almost continuous 
political unrest, although there were two particularly bad periods, c. 1360 and 
the 1420s. Certain regional studies provide further evidence for the connection 
between political instability and population dynamics. For example, the population of Normandy began increasing after the worst crises of the 1360s and 1370s 
were over. However, this increase was not long lived and was succeeded by another period of depopulation during the 1420s and 1430s. This is perhaps not 
surprising, given that Normandy was a primary battlefield between the English 
and French during these periods.

The two particularly acute periods of French state collapse are reflected in the 
territorial trajectory (Figure 9.1), which reached local minima in 1370 and 1430.

The latter nadir was a time of particularly desperate straits for the kingdom, 
when even the capital was lost to the Anglo-Burgundian forces. However, the 
secular trend was about to reverse itself, and while the current situation looked 
grim, France was actually on the brink of another period of territorial expansion 
(Figure 9.1).

The reason for this turnaround is suggested by the selfish elite model. Recollect 
that this model predicts that, in order for the state to be viable, it needs to keep a 
relatively low ratio of elites to commoners. The model, thus, makes a prediction 
that a centralization trend could not get going until the number of French nobles 
declined below a certain threshold. This is a prediction that may be tested with 
data. Qualitatively this proposal seems likely, given the enormous numbers of 
French nobles dispossessed during this period (Wright 1998). Additionally, the 
massive slaughter of "the flower of French nobility" at Crecy and Agincourt 
must have made a noticeable impact on their numbers. Thus, Dupaquier et al.

( 1988a:342) estimate that about 40% of the French nobility was lost at each 
battle.

The years 1430-1510 c.E. were a period of rapid and continuous expansion 
for the French state (Figure 9.1). First, by 1453 the English were expelled almost 
completely from the continent (retaining only a tiny area around Calais). By 
1480, France took over half of the Burgundian inheritance. Finally, in 1494 the 
