and delays in R will only slow the state expansion, but will not cause an imperial collapse. The feedback loop involving logistic loads, L, on the other hand, 
should operate without an appreciable time lag. For example, the effect of distance, which is how we modeled logistics, is instantaneous: as soon as territory 
is conquered, the boundary moves away from the center, and the state immediately incurs the higher costs of projecting its power to the new boundary. Other 
factors, such as policing the newly conquered population, also should impose an 
immediate extra burden on the state.

The general argument of this section, then, can be summarized as follows.

Imperial overstretch, at least as conceptualized by such geopolitical theorists as 
Collins and Kennedy, should not lead to state collapse. It is a first-order factor 
that acts to set a limit to further territorial expansion. Should the state, by chance, 
overstep this boundary, its power to defend the extra territory is immediately impaired. That territory may be reconquered by neighbors, or the state may abandon 
it as not worth the bother (as the Roman Empire did with Agri Decumates and 
Dacia). Such a retreat restores the ability of the state to defend itself. Thus, we 
need to look to other variables in order to understand the empirically observed 
examples of imperial collapse.

2.2.2 Positional Effects 
In order to investigate positional effects properly, we really need a spatially explicit model, which in practice usually means computer simulations. Before jumping into simulations, however, it is often a good idea to generate some expectations with a drastically simplified version of the model that permits analytical 
insights. Even if these insights are shown to be completely wrong by the subsequent simulation model, we learn something (at the least, we learn that explicit 
space is the key element in obtaining correct results). For this reason, let us 
consider the following simple model. It is a modification of the size-distance 
geopolitical model [Equations (2.11)] which assumes that territorial dynamics 
occurs in one-dimensional space. I will again assume that the logistic distance 
multiplier is a negative exponential function of distance, but now that we have 
one-dimensional space, A "' r. The resulting modified model is 
A= -ycAexp[-A/h]- a (2.12) 
(note that there is no square root associated with A inside the exponential). The 
additional parameter 'Y takes values 1 or 2, depending on whether the state has 
enemies at both boundaries, or only at one. In the second case, the state delivers 
twice as much power at the single boundary ( 'Y = 2). What is the effect of position 
(as codified by -y) on the resulting size of the state? To do a rough calculation, 
we approximate exp[x] with 1 +x. and solve the resulting equation for the A2 
equilibrium (the upper stable one), obtaining A2 =0.5h(l +J1-4afch-y). From 
this expression, we see that doubling 'Y does not result in doubling the equilibrium 
state size. To illustrate this with a numerical example, suppose that the equilibrium 
size of the state with enemies at both sides is only double the critical size below 
which the state collapses, A2 = 2A1• Then, having an enemy only on one side 
will increase A2 by about 30%. If A2 = 3A1 then the increment resulting from 
the marchland effect is less than 20%. Thus, this simple model suggests that the 
marchland position should yield a rather modest increase in the equilibrium state 
size. Its primary effect is to give some protection to states that are rather marginal 
in size (in fact, the marchland effect reduces the critical state size, A1, by 50%).

The Artzrouni and Komlos Model 
I now turn to the spatial simulation of territorial dynamics constructed by 
Artzrouni and Komlos (1996) to investigate hypotheses explaining the formation 
of the European state system. These investigators represented Europe as a grid 
GEOPOLITICS 21 
of unit squares, with linear dimensions of about 40 km. At time = 0 (which 
was assumed to correspond to 500 c.E.), the simulated space was filled with 
equal-sized states, each occupying 5 x 5 squares, and thus with a starting area of 
roughly 40,000 km2 (see Figure 2.4).

The two variables that affect the power of states in the Artzrouni and Komlos 
simulation are the area A (measured as the number of unit squares that make 
up a country) and the perimeter C (the number of squares that have a foreign 
neighbor). The power is increased by greater A, but decreased by greater C, 
because longer boundaries require more resources to defend. Note that this is a 
different conceptualization of logistic loads from the one used in the previous 
section. The marchland effect was modeled by treating state boundaries along the 
sea and mountains differently from those where no natural borders are present.

Artzrouni and Komlos assumed that a sea boundary is easier to defend. Therefore, 
in calculating the boundary length, each unit along the sea counted only as a 
fraction f of a unit along the land border. In addition, two European mountain 
chains, the Pyrenees and the Alps, were assumed to present impregnable natural 
barriers, so that unit squares abutting these areas were not counted as part of C.

However, the Pyrenees and the Alps did not completely cut off their respective 
peninsulas from the continent (see Figure 2.4).

Artzrouni and Komlos assumed the following specific form for the power function of state i: 
A. P.= I 
1 a+ exp[ -yC; + /3] (2.13) 
where A; and C; are the area and the perimeter of state i, respectively, and a, 
{3, and 'Y are positive constants. This function, although conceptualized differently, results in the same general shape of the relationship between the state 
size and power as in Model (2.11 ). As we increase A from 0, P first increases 
with A, as a result of the positive feedback associated with increased geopolitical 
resources. Eventually, however, the negative feedback associated with increased 
logistic loads overpowers the positive one, and for very high A, P declines to 0.

The relative powers of states determine their success in war with neighbors.

Each iteration of the model is made of one bilateral interaction (war). The simulation model chooses a country at random (call it i) and compares its power to 
the powers of all its neighbors. The simulation then determines which neighbor j 
differs the most in power from i (the j for which the absolute difference lP;- Pi I 
is maximized), and the two countries go to war. The more powerful country 
wins with probability l-0.5exp[-K(P;/Pi -1)]; otherwise, the weaker country 
wins. After the conclusion of war, all boundary squares of the loser contiguous 
to the winner are absorbed by the winner. The simulation then performs another 
iteration, choosing a country at random, etc. Each iteration corresponds to 1/3 
year.

The Artzrouni and Komlos model has five parameters (f, a, {3, -y, and K). The 
investigators used the method of trial and error to find the specific values of these 
parameters that would replicate the historically observed dynamic map of Europe 
as closely as possible. One particular realization of the simulation is shown in 
Figure 2.4 Territorial dynamics of the European state system as simulated by the model 
of Artzrouni and Komlos (1996). Top: initial map at 500 c.E. Bottom: model-predicted 
