
Thus, a peasant may have a lot of interactions with the village head, who in turn 
interacts with the local noble, and so on to the polity ruler. Two people inhabiting 
the same location may be very socially distant from each other (for example, a 
prince and a pauper). The horizontal dimension arises as a result of patteming 
in day-to-day activities such as working, raising children, or simply conversing 
to neighbors (Black 1998). There is a strong spatial component present in the 
horizontal dimension. Thus, a typical peasant will interact mostly with people in 
the same village, to a certain extent with inhabitants of nearby villages, and very 
little (if at all) with anybody in a different province.

Social space has some peculiar topological characteristics (Black 1998). First, it 
is often anisotropic, because downward interaction may be stronger than upward 
interaction. For example, the decision of a king to convert to Christianity has a 
much stronger effect on the probability that a peasant will convert than vice versa.

Second, higher ranked persons tend to belong to wider-scale social networks. For 
example, a noble of middle rank will likely have a closer connection to another 
noble in a nearby province than two peasants separated by a similar geographic 
distance. Finally, certain geographic features, such as mountains, tend to attenuate 
social distance. Perhaps a better measure would be not the physical distance, 
but distance measured in travel time. Horizontal anisotropy may also arise, for 
example, along rivers (it is much easier to move down river than against the 
current).

There is an important concept from epidemiology that can be useful in conceptualizing spatial models of linguistic assimilation and religious conversion. I 
refer to the contact distribution, which in epidemiology is defined as the probability of disease passing from one individual to another as a function of distance 
separating them. We can reinterpret the contact distribution as the intensity of 
social interaction between two people located at different points in the social 
space. In the context of religious conversion, the analogy is complete because 
we can interpret the contact distribution as the probability of religious conversion 
spreading from one individual to another. This formulation allows one, in principle, to model a variety of complicating effects, including heterogeneous space 
(e.g., mountains and other barriers), and anisotropy (such as larger-scale contact 
distributions characterizing higher-ranked persons). I will not pursue these complications here, because a model including all these realistic features would have 
to be solved by simulation on the computer. Instead, I will focus on how space 
can modify the frequency-dependent aspects of ethnokinetic processes. This topic 
is where we can profit from the analytical results made available by the epidemiological theory. I consider, first, the spatial extension of the autocatalytic model 
and, second, the threshold model (the noninteractive model is not affected by 
space, because each individual changes identity spontaneously and independently 
of what others do). In the following account I provide no mathematical equations, 
because the interested reader can find them in the appropriate special literature.

An introduction to the ecological aspects of spatial contact processes and models of spread can be found in my book on quantitative analysis of movement 
(Turchin 1998:70-72, 329-348). More technical accounts are in Murray (1993) 
and Mollison (1995). I do not need to delve into the mathematical results because 
all I do is take the already developed theory and reinterpret it in terms of social 
contacts and social influence on identity switching.

The Autocatalytic Model in Space 
To make the autocatalytic model spatially explicit, first we redefine the frequency 
of individuals with the core identity, C(t), into a spatially varying variable, 
C(x, y, z. t). Here x and y may stand for physical space coordinates and z for 
position in the social hierarchy; t is time as usual. As an illustration, C(x, y, z, t) 
might be the proportion of Christians among small merchants in a particular town 
at a particular point of time. Second, we define the contact distribution: V(s) is 
the intensity of social contacts between two individuals separated by social distance s. Note that in this model I assume that the contact distribution does not 
vary with space, rank, or time. As stated above, however, such modifications can 
be made, and the resulting model investigated numerically. Third, I assume that 
the probability of an individual switching identity is a function of the identities 
of other individuals in the social vicinity, weighted by their social distance to the 
focal individual. To illustrate how the model works, suppose the contact distribution is rectangular in shape, as in Figure 6.1a. This means that there is a certain 
ETHNOKINETICS 101 
(a) rectangular 
------. I 
I 
I (b) thin-tailed 
·-·--- (c) thick-tailed ....... _ 
·---·-·-·--· 
Social Distance 
Figure 6.1 Different shapes of the contact distribution: (a) rectangular, (b) "thin-tailed," 
and (c) "thick-tailed." 
circle of relatives and friends with which the focal individual interacts socially, 
and the intensity of interaction is the same with each individual in the circle. Outside the circle, however, the intensity of interaction is zero. Then, the probability 
of converting will simply be proportional to the fraction of individuals within the 
circle who are already converts.

The rectangular contact distribution is not a realistic shape for human social 
interactions, because some humans are likely to have very distant acquaintances, 
even though their interactions with them may not be very intense. Thus, the contact distribution should not end abruptly, but there must be some "tail" extending 
quite far for a few individuals (for example, long-distance merchants). The mathematical theory of spatial contact processes distinguishes two important cases: the 
"thin-tailed" case when the tail of the contact distribution declines exponentially 
(or faster) with social distance, and the "thick-tailed" case when the tail declines 
more slowly than exponentially (Figure 6.1 ). As we shall see below, these two 
classes of tails imply very different spatial dynamics.

When the contact distribution has a tail, it means that the focal individual makes 
a decision about conversion not only based on what others in the immediate social 
vicinity do, but also taking into account what the society at large does. However, 
the influence of socially distant individuals is much less than the influence of the 
close circle of friends and relatives. The diminution of influence with increasing 
social distance is measured with how fast the contact distribution drops off to 
zero.

The case of thin-tailed contact distributions is mathematically well understood.

If the probability of switching identity is directly proportional to the weighted 
average of identities held by others (the weights are given by the contact distribution), then this spatial contact process is well approximated by a reaction-diffusion 
model in which the local source/sink term is logistic, and spatial redistribution 
is simple diffusion. This model has been thoroughly investigated, starting with 
the seminal work of Fisher (1937) and Kolmogoroff et al. (1937) on the spatial 
