kinetics of linguistic or religious assimilation or the secular cycles resulting from 
demographic-structural processes.

9.1.2 Secular Waves 
The Principate Wave 
If the archaeological data presented by Lewit (1991) and discussed in Chapter 8 
really reflect population oscillations, then Roman Gaul must have gone through 
two oscillations, separated by a period of population decline during the troubled 
third century. The character of the cycle ending with the third-century decline (let 
us call it "the Principate wave," since that is what the Roman Empire during this 
period is often called) is quite clear. Most of Gaul (apart from the Roman Province 
in the south) was added to the Empire in the first century B.c.E. During the first 
century c.E., the frontier moved north and east, and Gaul began an extended 
period of peace and prosperity. As a result, the population grew (Figure 9.2).

From the first century B.C.E. to the second century c.E., the site occupation 
index increased by a factor of 3, so the actual population increase was probably 
even greater, because it is reasonable to suppose that settlement size also increased. This pattern of population growth was mirrored in the rest of the Empire 
(at least, in all the western provinces). According to the demographic-structural 
theory, such unchecked population growth should have inevitably led to state 
insolvency and eventual breakdown. This is precisely what happened. During 
the second century c.E., the Roman Empire experienced a great wave of inflation (Fischer, 1996: Figure 5.03). The state collapse followed, and during most 
of the third century, the empire lacked central authority. The proximate reasons 
for population decline were multifarious: famine, disease (the Antonine plagues), 
South Gaul 
100 )( 
Q) 
"C 
..5 80 
c: 
0 
:0::0 
m 
a.

60 
:::::J 
8 40 0 
~ en 20 
0 
-1 0 2 3 4 5 
Century C.E.

Figure 9.2 Population history of Roman Gaul. (data from Lewit 1991) 
CASE STUDIES 177 
internecine fighting that affected most of the territory, and barbarian invasions.

Additionally, during this period Romans practiced various reproduction control 
practices (mainly infanticide; see quotes in Stark 1996). Ultimately, however, it 
can be argued that all these causes of increased mortality and decreased fertility 
are connected to a high level of sociopolitical instability. Thus, Lewit shows that 
the depth of population decline in a province was correlated with the level of 
warfare it experienced during the calamitous third century.

The Dominate-Merovingian Wave 
It is interesting to observe that the population trajectories of the north and south 
Gaul, which moved in parallel up to the third century, diverged thereafter (Figure 
9.2). The site occupation index in the north declined to a lower level and enjoyed 
only a moderate increase after order was restored at the end of the third century. It 
then declined to a much lower level during the fifth century. The probable reason 
is that during the Dominate period northern Gaul became part of the Roman 
frontier and, as was discussed above, frontier conditions are not conducive to high 
population densities. The more intense the frontier, the sparser the population in 
the region, and apparently the frontier in northern Gaul was very intense.

As was discussed in the previous section, northern Gaul was a frontier between 
the old empire and challenger ethnies: mainly the Franks, but also the Alamanni 
and Burgundi. The Frankish chiefdom established a foothold just north of the 
Roman border during the third century, slowly penetrated south into northern 
Gaul during the fourth century, and came into its own-Regnum Francorumduring the fifth century. After its peak during the first half of the sixth century, it 
fragmented. By 600 c.E. there were four independent polities (Neustria, Austrasia, 
Burgundy, and Aquitaine), which continued to fragment to even smaller pieces 
during the seventh century. According to Slicher van Bath (1964:78), the low 
point of the post-Roman population probably came between 543 and 600 c.E. (see 
also Russell 1985). In other words, the population decline of the sixth century 
was accompanied by increased political instability, precisely as predicted by the 
demographic-structural theory. Again, there is no single factor that can be pointed 
to as the cause of population decline. Certainly both diseases (the plagues of 
Justinian) and warfare played a very important role. One interesting feature of this 
secular wave was the correlation in population declines between widely separated 
regions, belonging to separate polities, e.g., Gaul and Anatolia.

The Carolingian Wave 
After about a century of political turmoil, the secular trend again reversed itself, 
from decentralization to centralization. By 700 c.E. a rejuvenated Frankish polity 
was expanding again, reaching its peak in 800 under Charlemagne. There was 
a population upswing during the Carolingian era (starting during the seventh 
century), followed by a downturn after 900 (Reinhard et al. 1968, Duby 1974).

Several contemporaries describe the heartland of Charlemagne's empire (in NED) 
during the ninth century as full of people, or bursting at the seams with too many 
people. However, large areas of the empire were still available for assarting. Thus, 
the population peak of the ninth century, in absolute numbers, was nowhere near 
as great as the peak of 1300. But locally, in those areas that were cleared of 
forests, population density appears to have been high.

During the ninth century the Carolingian Empire fragmented. The east Frankish Kingdom was taken over by Saxons and eventually reorganized into the Holy 
Roman Empire, but that is outside the geographic region of current interest. The 
west Frankish Kingdom of Charles the Bald fragmented into duchies and counties. In the south, counts lost control over viscounts and castellans, resulting in 
an extreme dispersal of power in such areas as the Massif Central (Zimmerman 1995). Clearly, this was another secular trend inversion, and it was again 
