idea.

If the time-scale argument advanced in this chapter is accepted, it does not 
mean that geopolitical mechanisms (in the narrow sense) are unimportant in the 
explanation of the imperial rise and demise. They are just insufficient, and we 
must look to other variables in order to build the required theory. One potential 
avenue that seems worth exploring is to abandon the view of polities as "black 
boxes" and look into their inner workings. This will be our goal in the next 
chapter.

2.4 SUMMARY 
• There are three very general classes of dynamical behaviors. Zero-order dynamics, boundless growth or decline, arise in systems that are not affected by 
negative feedbacks. Examples include linear and exponential growth/decline 
processes. First-order dynamics characterize systems in which feedbacks 
act on a fast scale. First-order dynamics are equilibrial; examples include 
asymptotic and logistic growth processes. First-order dynamics may also be 
metastable (more than one stable equilibrium is present). Finally, secondorder dynamics arise in systems in which dynamical feedbacks act with a 
lag. Examples of second-order behaviors include a single boom/bust dynamic 
and sustained periodic or chaotic oscillations.

• The geopolitical theory of Randall Collins postulates three main mechanisms 
explaining territorial dynamics of states: geopolitical resources, logistical 
loads, and the marchland position.

• The mathematical model incorporating only the positive feedback between 
territory and geopolitical resources exhibits zero-order dynamics. If the initial 
state territory is above a certain threshold, then it grows in an accelerating 
fashion. However, if the initial territory is below the threshold, then the state 
shrinks and eventually disappears.

• Adding to the model the negative feedback of the logistical loads leads to 
first-order dynamical behavior, metastability. Again, if the initial territory is 
below the threshold, the state loses ground and disappears. However, starting 
above the threshold, the territory does not increase without bound, as in the 
simpler model, but approaches an upper equilibrium. This equilibrium is 
stable with respect to small perturbations.

• In order to examine the positional effects I turn to a spatial simulation model 
developed by Artzrouni and Komlos. This model suggests that states initially 
enjoying marchland advantage (a higher proportion of boundary along a 
coastline) grow to larger sizes than inland states. However, the model does 
not exhibit any second-order oscillations: the loser states disappear, while 
the winners grow to the limits set by logistical factors, where their size is 
stabilized.

• Finally, I review the simulation model of conflict legitimacy dynamics developed by Hanneman and eo-workers. I show that if we translate this model 
into differential equations, then we again obtain a first-order system that is 
incapable of second-order oscillations.

• An analysis of growth/decline data tabulated by Rein Taagepera suggests 
that long periods of imperial decline (more than a century) are frequently 
found in the historical record (12 cases out of 31). This finding strongly suggests that at least in some historical cases imperial dynamics were governed 
by second-order mechanisms. However, models based on purely geopolitical 
mechanisms do not predict such prolonged declines. Thus, we must investigate other mechanisms of imperial collapse.

Chapter Three 
Collective Solidarity 
3.1 GROUPS IN SOCIOLOGY 
3.1.1 Groups as Analytical Units 
In the previous chapter I suggested that we cannot understand the territorial dynamics of polities without studying their inner workings. This raises an important 
question: what are the elementary units in terms of which our theories should be 
constructed? The philosophical principle of methodological individualism maintains that ultimately sociological theories should be based on the properties of 
individuals. I agree with this approach in principle, especially if we stress the key 
word ultimately. However, methodological individualism, in my opinion, must be 
tempered with two important caveats. First, the idea that individuals are somehow 
more "real" than groups does not appear to be tenable. Human individuals cannot 
exist apart from a group and remain human (as real-life "Mowglis" attest). Furthermore, human groups are more than simple collections of individuals. Uc!ike 
animal groups, human groups are uniquely able to plan and purposefully carry 
out actions (Alexander and Borgia 1978; Melotti 1987).

Second, an attempt to follow the prescription of methodological individualism 
in one step does not appear to be a good modeling strategy (Section 1.2.3). Polities, especially such complex ones as empires, contain multitudes of individuals 
differing among themselves in a multitude of ways. Furthermore, an individual 
primarily interacts with a small subset of others, rather than directly with everybody else in the polity. In other words, large human societies consist of a 
number of groups, often hierarchically nested within each other. Thus, a much 
better modeling strategy would be to break the problem into two (or more) steps.

First, we would like to understand how group dynamics arise from individual 
action, and then we can use g~up properties to model polity dynamics. "There 
is a distinctly sociological way of looking at the world. It holds that the key to 
understanding social life lies with the analysis of groups, rather than individuals." 
(Hechter 1987:2) An excellent example of such a hierarchical approach that introduces groups as intermediate actors between individuals and social dynamics 
is Jack Goldstone's (1994) analysis of revolutionary action. We also should keep 
in mind that eventually it will be necessary to progress to the next level and 
consider how polities interact within world-systems.

There are two characteristics that are particularly responsible for making human groups not just collections of individuals, but agents in their own right: the 
tendency to draw social boundaries and the capacity for group-oriented action 
even if it is individually costly.

Social Boundaries 
Humans use many cues to demarcate group membership (Shaw and Wong 1989; 
Masters 1998). One of the most important recognition markers is language, especially dialect, accent, and speech patterns. For example, there is abundant experimental evidence from several societies that people are more disposed to cooperate 
with others who have the same dialect as themselves, even when dialectal differences are slight (Nettle 1999:57). Phenotypic similarity provides a number of 
potential markers: visible resemblance of facial and body form (and even odor); 
movement patterns, facial expression, and behavioral stereotypes; clothing and ornaments; and style and manners (the latter are especially important for signaling 
social class). Speech dialect and phenotype provide obvious, instantaneous information about group membership. Other categories of markers include kinship 
(presumed common descent; can be fictitious), religion (shared beliefs, norms, 
and rituals), and territory or proximity of residence (Masters 1998:456-457). The 
last category can also include shared membership in the same polity (nationalism 
