of the arena, while the rest of the cells were assigned to nonimperial hinterland.

Empire 1 grew rapidly for about ten time steps, until it occupied half of the 
available space, and then stabilized due to logistic constraints. During this first 
period of relative stasis, a stationary imperial frontier was established, which 
caused an increase of asabiya in the frontier zone just outside the empire. Soon 
after time step 20, a bunch of trajectories suddenly appeared, as a result of asabiya 
in the frontier zone increasing to the point where small polities began conquering 
each other. Only four polities (Empires 2, 9, 11, and 16) survived of this initial 
bunch, and grew first to consolidate the area around them, and then at the expense 
of Empire 1, causing its eventual extinction. During this process all area was 
divided between the four empires (no hinterland was left). A second period of 
relative stasis ensued, succeeded by an abrupt growth of Empires 9 and 16 at 
the expense of the other two. However, Empires 2 and 11 were not extinguished.

After the third period of relative stasis, when the asabiyas of the two large empires 
declined while the asabiyas of smaller empires grew, another period of rapid 
change caused Empires 9 and 16 to collapse, while Empires 2 and 11 grew to 
take over most of their territory. Interestingly, one portion of the arena turned 
stateless as a result of Empire 9 collapsing, and this area was not conquered by 
the remaining empires. The fourth period of stasis was ended by the appearance 
of a new empire (17) arising in the stateless area. This eventually led to the 
collapse of one of the older empires, and a period of back-and-forth dynamics 
between the two remaining polities.

70 
(/) 
"' ~ 
0.6 
<( 
~ 0.4 
;f 
0.2 
0 50 100 150 200 
Time 
6~---------------------------------------T,~--~ Mongol 
- 4 N 
E 
:E 
-
"' ! 
<( 2 
l-
' ' ' ' 0 ' ' 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Centuries C.E.

Figure 4.4 (a} Dynamics of the spatial asabiya-area model. Each curve depicts the territorial dynamics of simulated empires (polity area is expressed as a fraction of the total arena occupied). Model parameters are r0 = 0.2, 8 = 0.1, h = 2, Scri1 = 0.003, and 
ll.p = 0.1. Numbers associated with the trajectories are the imperial indices of the polities.

(b) Expansion-contraction curves of areas for polities in East and Central Asia, 600-1200 
c.E. (Data from Taagepera 1997: Appendix) 
The model-generated trajectories look quite similar to the trajectories of historical polities (compare to Figure 4.4b). One striking similarity is how periods 
of rapid change are succeeded by periods of relative stasis. Another similarity is 
how situation dependent are the dynamics of polities. In particular, the maximum 
quasistable area during each stasis period is quite variable, despite all empires be-
THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 71 
ing subjected to the same logistical constraint function. This variability is, first, 
due to history resulting in a variable proportion of high-asabiya cells producing 
different average asabiya at the empire level. Second, since the location of boundaries reflects the balance of the opposing forces exerted by neighboring polities, 
the ultimate size of the empire depends very much on the relative powers of 
neighbors.

The qualitative similarity between historical polity trajectories and the simulated ones does not, of course, constitute any "proof' that the theoretical and 
empirical dynamics are driven by the same mechanism. In general, for any potential pattern there are an infinite number of mechanisms that can produce it: 
the mapping between mechanisms and patterns is many to one. Thus, in order 
to build empirical support for the frontier hypothesis, we will need to subject it 
to rigorous empirical testing (this will be our task in Chapter 5). Nevertheless, 
the observation that several features of the model's output match the observed 
dynamics is, at the very least, an encouragement to further theory developing 
and testing. Remember that the dynamic patterns in Figure 4.4a were not built 
in as model assumptions. On the contrary, they are an emergent macroscale feature of the assumptions about specific microscale mechanisms. Furthermore, the 
match between the observed and predicted dynamics goes beyond the superficial 
resemblance. Consider, for example, the political dynamics in Central-East Asia 
during the twelfth century. At that time there were two large empires (Sung and 
Tufan) with stationary borders throughout most of the century. Then a bundle of 
four "challenger" polities arrived on the scene: Western Liao, Jurchen, Khwarism, 
and Mongol. All challengers arose in the northern frontier zone. By the end of 
the thirteenth century, only one of the challenger polities survived (Mongol); the 
other three, as well as the two older empires were destroyed by it. This is very 
similar to what happens in the simulation during time steps 20-30, when a bundle 
of challenger polities arise in the frontier zone surrounding Empire 1, with most 
of them (as well as Empire 1 itself) eventually consumed by the four winning 
empires.

Trajectory Instability of Model Dynamics 
One interesting feature of the model is that its output is very erratic looking. In 
fact, if we repeatedly simulate the model starting with exactly the same initial 
condition (the initial location and asabiya of Empire 1), each run will produce 
wildly different outcomes. Because the rules of change are largely deterministic 
(the only way stochasticity enters in the model is in the order in which cells 
become potential attackers, as well as in the order in which neighboring cells are 
attacked), this observation suggests that the model behaves chaotically. To check 
on this, I removed all stochasticity from the simulation (by fixing the order of 
attackers and directions to attack). The purely deterministic model still produced 
very erratic-looking trajectories (although now, of course, each run was exactly 
the same as the previous one). However, a small change in the initial conditions 
(for example, adding or subtracting a single cell from the initial state of Empire l) 
again produced rapidly diverging trajectories. Thus, it appears that the simulation 
is indeed characterized by chaotic dynamics (that is, sensitive dependence on 
initial conditions; Ruelle 1989).
