
6.3 EMPIRICAL TESTS 
The three models of Section 6.2.1 provide a reasonable starting point for empirical 
tests of the ethnokinetics theory. I will focus on testing the nonspatial models 
because currently I do not have access to any spatial data sets on conversion or 
assimilation that could allow testing of spatial models. It is true that spatial models 
predict somewhat different global patterns of the temporal course of assimilation 
(as depicted in Figure 6.2), and theoretically one could capitalize on that to devise 
an empirical test. Several practical problems, however, prevent a straightforward 
implementation of this idea. First, the patterns depicted in Figure 6.2 are highly 
stylized. To obtain more precise quantitative predictions it would be necessary to 
numerically solve spatially explicit models based on various assumptions about 
the process of identity switching and the shape of the contact distribution. Second, 
all three trajectories in Figure 6.2 predict roughly S-shaped dynamics. Given 
realistic data, affected by various degrees of process and observation noise, it will 
be difficult to distinguish between the theoretical alternatives in practice. In other 
words, I argue that approaches attempting to distinguish between spatial models 
on the basis of data on global patterns of ethnic change will be characterized 
by low statistical power. We need explicitly spatial data to test explicitly spatial 
models.

In contrast to spatial models, global curves of ethnic change should provide us 
with an excellent opportunity to design an empirical test for nonspatial models 
(the noninteractive, the autocatalytic, and the threshold processes). Nevertheless, 
one must choose the response variable carefully in order to maximize the statistical power of the test. A response or dependent variable in statistics is something 
that is predicted on the basis of predictor or independent variables (Box and 
Draper 1987). We distinguish between alternative models by determining how 
well they predict the response variable. The model that predicts the response 
variable the best is the one that is best supported by the data. The obvious, but 
not necessarily optimal, choice of a response variable for contrasting the predictive abilities of the three models would be the trajectory C(t), the proportion 
ETHNOKINETICS 105 
in the core at time t. Consider, for example, the trajectories predicted by the 
noninteractive and the autocatalytic models (see Figures 2.1c and d). Given nonplentiful data and large amounts of noise (which is the realistic assumption in 
historical applications), it will often be difficult to determine whether the curve 
has an initially accelerating phase or not. By contrast, if we look at the predictions 
that different models make about the rate of change of C, the contrast between 
the models is very stark (Figure 6.3). The noninteractive model predicts the linear relationship between C and C (Figure 6.3a), while the autocatalytic model 
predicts a humped curve (Figure 6.3c ). A simple contrast between the slopes of 
the relationships for C < 0.5 (negative versus positive) is sufficient to detennine 
which model is closer to reality. The prediction of the threshold model is also 
very striking: a negative rate of change for C < C0 (Figure 6.3e). Another useful 
contrast between the autocatalytic and threshold models is in their predictions for 
relative rates of change, C/C (Figure 6.3d versus f; examining the relative rate 
of change for the noninteractive model, panel b, is not very instructive, but is 
included for completeness).

The take-home message here is that, while we should certainly examine empirical time trajectories and compare them to trajectories predicted by models, in 
order to more fully utilize the data we should also plot them (and fit models to 
them) in the way depicted in Figure 6.3. Doing so allows us a closer approach to 
the mechanisms that may underlie the observed trajectories, because we examine 
the structure of the dynamical process at the level of the differential equation (by 
plotting the observed rate of change versus the state variable), rather than at the 
more phenomenological level of the time solution of the equation.

I now apply these ideas to three data sets, dealing with conversion to Islam, 
Christianity, and Monnonism. Our goal is to determine which of the three alternative models provides the closest match to the empirical patterns.

6.3.1 Conversion to Islam 
The Data 
The first case study is based on the remarkable database developed by Richard 
Bulliet. One of the characteristic cultural products of Islamic society has been 
the literary genre of the biographical dictionary (Bulliet 1979:9). The numerous 
biographical compilations, which contain many hundreds of individual entries, 
provide unique sources of quantifiable data for medieval Islamic societies. Bulliet 
analyzed the almost six thousand biographies contained in Iranian biographical 
dictionaries and discovered a very interesting pattern. There is an almost complete 
absence of Persian names among the subjects of biographies, who belonged to 
the religiously eminent upper class, and were characterized by a universal custom 
of giving their sons Arabic names. Yet Persian names appear in the genealogies 
of the biographical subjects. Over two-thirds of genealogical sequences are initiated by a Persian name, followed by a shift to exclusively Arabic ones (Bulliet 
1979:18). Bulliet hypothesized that the Persian name that initiates the sequence 
is that of the first family member to become a Muslim (this proposal can be 
confinned in certain cases by independent infonnation). Thus, it is likely that the 
Rate of change (C) Relative rate of change (ClC) 
(b) 
0 1 0 
c c 
Figure 6.3 Predicted relationships between C and the rates of change C (panels a, c, and 
e) and the relative rates of change C/C (panels b, d, and t) for the noninteractive model 
(panels a and b), the autocatalytic model (panels c and d), and the threshold model (panels 
e and t).

subgroup of genealogies that begin with a Persian name can provide reliable data 
on the approximate date of conversion of specific Iranian families. There were 
469 genealogies that fell into this subgroup. Bulliet divided the Muslim calendar into 25 year periods, and calculated the expected proportion of conversions 
falling within each period (see Bulliet 1979: Chapter 3 for further details).

Large numbers of genealogies are also available for Iraq, Syria. Egypt, and 
Spain. It would be very useful to perform the same analysis for these areas, as 
ETHNOKINETICS 107 
a way to check on the results from Iran. Unfortunately, the occurrence of nonArabic names in Iraq, Syria, and Egypt is very rare. All these areas became Arabic 
speaking in time, and Iraq and Syria were inhabited by speakers of languages related to Arabic even prior to Islamic conquest. In Spain, fortunately, the situation 
is different (Bulliet 1979: Chapter 10). Bulliet identified 154 Spanish genealogies 
beginning with non-Arabic names from five biographical dictionaries. Performing 
the analysis along the lines of the Iranian genealogical database, he calculated the 
proportion of families converting during each 50-year period (a longer period has 
to be used since there are fewer data points than in the Iranian case). We can use 
these data as an independent check on the Iranian data, because Muslim Spain 
was a region isolated both geographically and in time (it was conquered some 
seventy years after Iran}.
