bundle of cultural differences, including very different behavioral norms, as well 
as attitudes to each other. Score 1 distinguishes agriculturalists with urbanized 
culture and literacy (at least, among some social stratum) from "backwoods" 
cultivators.

Finally, the intensity of warfare index codes for the demographic impact of 
war across the metaethnic divide. The highest score of 2 reflects intense warfare 
(up to and including genocide) that results in detectable depopulation of the area.

Score 1 is given to persistent raiding for loot and captives that does not cause a 
significant drop in the population numbers. Finally, the score of 0 corresponds to 
either relatively peaceful interaction, or "mild" warfare, practiced by the elites, 
and not affecting the demographics of the productive class.

The total score for frontier intensity is obtained by summing the religion, language, way of life, and warfare intensity indices. It varies from 0 to 9. Note 
that, ~cause religion has an extra intensity level, compared to other indices, this 
approach gives it a somewhat bigger weight in the final score. I believe that this 
is appropriate, given the important role of religion in erecting and maintaining 
metaethnic divisions.

Details of translating historical information into frontier scores are given in 
Appendix B. Briefly, I examined the history of each cultural region, and determined whether at any given point in time it had a state boundary running through 
it, or next to it. If the region was in the interior of a large empire, it was assigned 
the frontier index of 0. Similarly, a region would be assigned an index of 0 if 
it was situated in a stateless environment (that is, chiefdoms and smaller-scale 
polities). If a region was on a state boundary, then I scored the four components 
of ethnic interaction intensity, as described above, and summed them for a total 
frontier score. If there were two or more frontiers running through the same region, I used the highest score (the assumption being that frontier intensities do 
not add up).

5.1.2 Polity Size 
In the test I am setting up, the frontier intensity is the independent (predictor) 
variable. For the dependent (response) variable, we need some measure of imperial success. One appropriate measure, as discussed in Section 1.2.1, is simply 
the territorial extent of polities. Accordingly, I quantified the imperial success as 
the maximum extent of territory controlled at the peak. One disadvantage of this 
measure is that it does not distinguish between empires that reached the peak 
quickly, and as quickly collapsed, from more durable polities. It is clear that a 
longer-lived polity was probably based on a greater degree of asabiya, since surviving for many centuries means that the polity has encountered and overcome 
a number of challenges. By contrast, an evanescent empire may have just been 
lucky, by capitalizing on temporary weaknesses of its rivals. One way to distinguish between these two cases is to build duration into the index. For example, 
we can integrate the area under the territorial curve of a polity. I plan to pursue 
this idea in future (work in progress), but for now I will be content with a simpler 
measure based on the maximum territory.

The metaethnic frontier model predicts where large territorial polities should 
arise. The distinction between large polities and the rest is, of course, arbitrary, 
but I need some cutoff point, simply in order not to have to deal with a myriad 
of small polities, such as lesser Imperial states in the early modem Europe. I set 
the threshold at 0.1 Mm2 (1 Mm= 1,000 km; thus 1 Mm2 = 106 km2), which 
is comparable to the area of smaller-sized geographic units in Figure 5.1. In 
other words, I do not care to consider polities that occupy only a fraction of a 
geographic unit.

In addition to the cut-off point for polity size, I also need a cut-off for cumulative frontier intensity. After all, the theory does not predict that just any state 
boundary would serve as an asabiya generator. A frontier must be intense and its 
influence on the area long in duration. The second attribute is important because 
asabiya increases on a long time scale. Thus, a frontier that rapidly moved through 
an area is unlikely to cause any ethnogenetic events. More likely, the area will 
be incorporated into the advancing empire, and as the frontier moves away, the 
forces acting on the population of the area will cause asabiya to decline, rather 
than increase. To incorporate both of these attributes, I required that a frontier, 
in order to be classified as "asabiya generator," should have an intensity of 5 or 
higher (note that 5 is the midpoint of the frontier intensity scale), and should 
persist in the given cultural area for three centuries or longer.

We are now ready to specify the prediction of the theory in terms that can be 
immediately testable. Cultural regions where the frontier intensity is 5 or higher 
for three or more centuries are expected to be the sources of territorial polities 
with maximum areas larger than 0.1 Mm2• By "sources," I mean regions where 
large polities originated, which are inhabited by the polity's core elites, and where 
they typically have capitals. We can test this prediction by classifying all units 
in a two-way table as (1) with or without metaethnic frontiers, and (2) with or 
without a polity over 0.1 Mm2 at some later time (this will be specified below).

The theory predicts that the cells "no frontier and no empire," and "frontier 
and empire" should have more entries than randomly expected. Some entries in 
the "frontier, but no empire" cell are also expected. The most common reason 
for this happening, as predicted by the model of Section 4.2.2, is that some 
other region nearby, and also on the frontier, may get its empire going first, and 
conquer the region we are observing before it has the chance to develop its own 
empire. Another potential reason is that in the real world the increase of asabiya 
leading to the foundation of an aggressive empire must be a stochastic process, so 
variable periods of time may pass before it is complete. Nevertheless, if a region 
is situated on a frontier for a long period of time without being taken over by 
another empire, and does not develop its own empire, then this is an anomaly, as 
far as the theory is concerned.

AN EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE METAETHNIC FRONTIER THEORY 83 
The entries in the "no frontier, but empire" category, however, present the 
greatest empirical challenge to the theory, because according to it, there should 
be no such observations. Adopting the Lakatosian perspective, we will treat such 
observations as anomalies. If there are too many anomalous observations, then 
the theory collapses, especially if there is an alternative that can explain the 
observations better. The value of anomalies is that they often suggest how an 
alternative theory can be constructed.

5.2 RESULTS 
I now proceed to presenting the results, starting with Europe during the first 
millennium c.E., and then Europe during the period up to 1900 c.E. The description of intermediate steps in the analysis and data tables has been banished to 
Appendix B.
