other slow dynamical variable (see Section 2.1.4). An example of second-order 
oscillations is the dynamics of the demographic-fiscal model of state breakdown 
(Figure 7.1). Unlike typical first-order cycles, in which the increase and decrease 
phases are each one generation long, second-order oscillations are characterized 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 153 
by increase and decrease phases of multiple generations in duration. Thus, the 
basic trichotomy of generation, first-order, and second-order cycles results in 
typical periods of one, two, or many generations.

Let us consider what would be an appropriate temporal scale for studying 
second-order oscillations, were they to exist for human populations. Population 
theory based on discrete models suggests that second-order cycles are characterized by a minimum period of six generations (Murdoch et al. 2002). Typical 
periods in such models range from 6 to 12-15 and more generations (Turchin 
2003). Bracketing the human generation time by 20 and 30 years suggests that 
second-order cycles in humans should have periods ranging from 120 to 450 
years, with the most likely region of 200-300 years. Of course, this calculation 
assumes that factor X -the slow dynamical variable, whose interaction with population density drives the oscillations-operates at a temporal scale similar to that 
characterizing movements of human populations. However, this is probably not a 
bad assumption, to a first approximation, because if the two interacting variables 
operate on too different temporal scales then we cannot easily get second-order 
dynamics (if one variable operates on a time scale much faster than the other, 
the feedback for the slow variable essentially becomes "fast," and the dynamics become first order). Similar periods are suggested by simple continuous-time 
models. For example, in the Lotka-Volterra predation model (Section 2.1.3), the 
period of oscillations is approximately 2'11fJ(,r~). where r is the per capita rate 
of prey population growth, and ~ is the analogous parameter for the predators 
(it is actually the per capita decline rate of predator population in the absence of 
prey). Assuming that r and ~ are of the same order of magnitude as the intrinsic 
per capita rate of human population growth, r0 , leads to a (very rough) period 
estimate of 27Tfr0 . Because r0 of human populations should be around 0.02 yr-• 
(although in modem times some populations have been known to grow at 4% 
annual rate, this is probably an overestimate for historical times), the estimate of 
the oscillation period is 300 years. This estimate is similar to that suggested by 
the discrete-time theory above. In summary, my expectation is that second-order 
cycles in human populations, if they exist, should be characterized by periods of 
2-3 centuries.

The rough calculations in the above paragraph should be taken only as an indicator of the order of magnitude of period length that might characterize secondorder oscillations in human population dynamics. Clearly, periodicity will change 
depending on the nature of variables, model structure, and parameter values. On 
the other hand, we do have a theory for population dynamics in agrarian societies 
(Chapter 7). Models based on the demographic-structural theory predict oscillations with period ranging from one to three centuries, depending on the model 
structure and parameter values. This theoretical result provides a somewhat firmer 
basis for the prediction of oscillation periods.

Temporal Scale: Millennia 
Finally, I briefly turn to processes operating on much longer-millennial-scales.

This is the time scale of evolution of human societies, including their technological and cultural components. The big roadposts are the agricultural and industrial 
revolutions, respectively around 10,000 and 200 years ago. Currently, the pace 
of change has become almost frenetic, but prior to the industrial revolution, we 
can still probably assume some degree of quasistationarity at the scale of each 
millennium. Thus, according to the estimates of McEvedy and Jones (1978), the 
typical doubling time of the global human population, prior to the industrial age, 
was around 1000 years.

Evolutionary change of human societies is certainly something that we have 
to take into account when analyzing long-term data on human population 
dynamics (see, for example, Komlos and Nefedov 2002). If our main interest is 
not in millennial-scale processes, however, we will have to apply detrending to 
the data. Detrending is particularly appropriate in those cases where we have a 
clear mechanistic basis for understanding why the carrying capacity has changed 
historically. Ideally, we would use historical information to estimate how many 
people a unit of land could maintain, given the contemporary level of technology.

Here I will not follow this tack, because it would take me much beyond the 
scope of this book, and simply employ phenomenological detrending methods.

Implications 
The preceding discussion makes it clear that the appropriate temporal scale for 
studying human dynamics depends greatly on the questions of interest. If we 
are concerned with the dynamics of measles epidemics, then we should use the 
scale of months and years. At the other extreme, if we are interested in modeling 
how the capacity of the Earth to sustain human population evolved as a result 
of technological and societal change, then our time scale is centuries and millennia. However, if we are interested in first-order processes that regulate human 
population density, and in mechanisms that may cause second-order cycles, then 
our temporal scale should be intermediate: decades (the basic time step at which 
we measure population density) and centuries (the length of time series). More 
specifically, we need to follow a population for at least 500-600 years, in order to 
have the minimum sample size, two oscillations (assuming that each oscillation 
is around 2-3 centuries in length). This is a rough guide, but it suggests that if 
we have data sampled at yearly intervals, we might just as well subsample the 
series at 10-year intervals-we are not really throwing out any useful information 
by doing that. Data series sampled at 20- or 30-year intervals (approximately one 
human generation) are also acceptable. But any data series that was collected at 
intervals greater than two generations (50 years) is seriously undersampled. After 
all, one needs at the minimum four points per cycle to characterize it as such, 
and one-fourth of a cycle of 200-300 years is 50-75 years.

I searched the literature on historical demography for time-series data of sufficient length (at least 500 years) and sampled at sufficiently frequent intervals (not 
more than 50 years) for a defined locality (typically corresponding to a modem 
country or to a province in a country). One problem in obtaining data relevant to 
our purposes is that historical demographers ask very different kinds of questions.

A population dynamicist is primarily interested in relative changes of density with 
time, and knowing the absolute scale is not as important. By contrast, historical 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 155 
demographers typically attempt to estimate the absolute density at a particular 
point in time. Another problem is that a large amount of guesswork is often 
involved in reconstructing the historical dynamics of human populations. Historical demography is a very controversial subject, and hugely different estimates of 
population numbers can be profferred by different authorities. One possible way 
of getting around the subjective element is the methods of archaeology, and I will 
