systems. Although these facts are fairly elementary, they are worth discussing, 
because (I) they may not be well known to people lacking extensive experience 
with dynamic models, and (2) it gives me a chance to introduce a simple classification scheme, to which I can then refer throughout the book. An excellent 
introduction to dynamical social systems can be found in Fararo (1989).

2.1.1 Boundless Growth 
The simplest possible dynamics is linear growth, obeying the differential equation 
X=c (2.1) 
Here X is the variable that is changing, X is the rate of change of X (often written 
as dXfdt), and c is a constant. A familiar application of this model is Newton's 
first law, in which X is the position of a body and c a constant velocity. (The 
first law states that, in the absence of any forces acting on the body, it will move 
with constant velocity.) The solution of this equation is X(t) = X0 +et, where t 
is time and X0 is the initial position of the body, X(O) = X0 • The solution says 
that X will change linearly with time (Figure 2.la), and that the rate of change 
is c. Thus, I refer to this kind of dynamics as linear growth (or decline, if c is 
negative).

--
S< 
-
~ 
(f) 
-
~ 
t t 
Figure :u Qualitative types of dynamics: (a) linear, (b) exponential, (c) asymptotic, 
(d) logistic, (e) boom and bust, and (f) sustained oscillations.

Another simple model of growth obeys the following differential equation: 
(2.2) 
This is the exponential growth model. The parameter r is another constant, called 
the relative rate of change (because the total rate of change is the product of 
the relative rate r and X). Because the rate of change of X is assumed to be 
proportional to X itself, this type of growth is sometimes called autocatalytic: 
the more X there is, the faster it grows. The exponential equation provides the 
simplest model for the growth of biological populations and can be thought of as 
the first law of population dynamics (Turchin 2003). The autocatalytic part arises 
because the more animals there are in the population, the faster the population 
grows (since each animal can reproduce). The solution of the exponential model 
is a curve bending up (Figure 2.1 b).

GEOPOLITICS 11 
The linear and exponential models are examples of boundless growth. Such 
models often provide good starting points for modeling dynamical systems, because they make minimal assumptions about the system. In other words, they are 
null models, and that is why the first laws of mechanics and population dynamics 
belong to this class. But boundless growth models, by themselves, are not good 
models for the overwhelming majority of dynamic phenomena, because few reallife systems exhibit limitless growth. We need to add other mechanisms to the 
right-hand side of equations.

2.1.2 EquUibrial Dynamics 
Few real-life processes grow without bound. Usually, there are some 
mechanisms-generally called negative feedbacks-that act to impose upper and 
lower limits on growth. One of the most important characteristics of a negative 
feedback mechanism is the lag time with which it operates. Some feedback 
mechanisms operate on a time scale that is much faster than the time scale at 
which the modeled variable X changes. In such cases we usually neglect the 
lag and assume that the feedback is instantaneous. A simple model that adds an 
instantaneous negative feedback to the linear growth is 
X=c-dX (2.3) 
Here two processes affect the dynamics of X. One force increases X at a constant rate c, but there is also a counteracting force, whose strength increases 
proportionately to X. At some point (specifically, when X reaches X*= cjd), the 
strengths of the positive push and negative pull balance each other, and X stops 
growing. The point X* where the rate of change of X is zero is called an equilibrium. Equilibria can be stable or unstable. For this model, the equilibrium X* is 
stable, because when X is below the equilibrium, the positive push overwhelms 
the negative pull; and vice versa, if X somehow gets above X*, then the negative 
pull will overwhelm the positive push, and return X back to the equilibrium. A 
typical trajectory for X predicted by equation (2.3) is initially linear (at low X) 
and then slows asymptotically as X approaches equilibrium (Figure 2.lc). I will 
refer to such dynamics as linear-asymptotic or asymptotic growth, for short.

Adding a negative feedback to the model of exponential growth is also simple.

In this case, let us assume that the relative growth rate r is a linear function of 
X: r(X) = r0 - gX. This leads to the logistic equation 
X = r(X)X = (r0 - gX)X (2.4) 
Logistic growth is illustrated in Figure 2.ld.

Both asymptotic and logistic dynamics belong to the class of singledimensional or first-order differential models. The general form of first-order 
models is X= f(X), where f(X) is some arbitrary function of X. For example, 
in the logistic model, f(X) = (r0 - gX)X is a quadratic function of X. These 
models are called first order (or one dimensional) because there is only one 
structural variable, X. (In mathematical applications structural variables are 
called state variables, because they describe the state of the system. The use 
of this standard terminology in dynamical systems, however, would create 
unnecessary confusion because the main subject of this book is states in the 
meaning of polities.) 
In addition to the kinds of dynamics illustrated by the asymptotic and logistic models, in which the system is always attracted to a unique stable equilibrium, single-dimensional models can also have a more complex behavior, called 
metastable dynamics. For example, if f(X) is a cubic polynomial, so that the 
model is 
X =a(X -b)(c-X)X (2.5) 
(a, b, and c are positive constants), then there are three equilibria: two stable 
ones (a low and a high equilibrium), and one unstable in the middle. If X is 
initially below the unstable equilibrium, the trajectory will be attracted to the 
low equilibrium. Alternatively, if X starts above the unstable point, the trajectory 
is attracted to the high equilibrium. One social science application of such an 
equation is in modeling "tipping" behaviors (see Chapter 6).

One very important fact that we need to know for later is that first-order differential models are incapable of oscillatory dynamics. They cannot even exhibit 
a single (rise-and-fall) oscillation. Fast negative feedbacks, operating without an 
