
The implications of this analysis are startling, but before making any far reaching conclusions, we need to check on these results by looking at other data sets.

The first obvious place to look to is other western European countries during the 
last millennium. I am unaware of any data sets similar in quality and length to 
the one constructed by Wrigley and eo-workers, but a useful overview, albeit of 
lesser quality, is provided by the population atlas of McEvedy and Jones. This in 
many ways excellent compilation of long-term population dynamics, organized by 
country, suffers, in my opinion, from one failing: the tendency of the authors to 
underemphasize the degree of fluctuation. To give an example where we can obtain an independent check, McEvedy and Jones suggest that population numbers 
in England increased throughout the seventeenth century (although at a declining 
rate): 4.25, 5, and 5.75 million in 1600, 1650, and 1700 c.E., respectively. Yet the 
population reconstruction by Wrigley and eo-workers, which became available 
after the publication of the McEvedy and Jones atlas, suggests that all population 
increase occurred during the first half (from 5.05 to 5.83 million), and in fact 
population slightly decreased by the early eighteenth century (to 5.73 million in 
1710). Nevertheless, there is a virtue in the conservatism of McEvedy and Jones: 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Century C.E.

Figure 8.2 Population of several European countries, 1000-2000 c.E. The countries are 
(in order of population magnitude at 1000 c.E., from larger to smaller) France, Italy, Spain, 
Germany, Czechoslovakia, Portugal. Data from McEvedy and Jones, supplemented by U.S.

Census Bureau for year 2000.

where they indicate sharp changes in population numbers, it is likely that the 
historical evidence for such events is quite strong.

In Figure 8.2 I reproduce the population trajectories suggested by McEvedy 
and Jones for the four largest western European countries, as well as for two 
smaller ones, located to the southwest, and east, respectively, of the big four.

Although the data are not detailed enough for formal analysis, we see that the 
general pattern exhibited by England is also present in other European countries: an increasing millennia! trend, and three secular cycles around the trend, 
with population growth slowing down or reversing in the fourteenth, seventeenth, 
and late twentieth centuries. Only France does not exhibit a seventeenth-century 
decline, which is a result of the McEvedy and Jones conservatism referred to 
above (as we shall see in the next chapter, where I look at more detailed French 
population data). Additionally, the averaging of the dynamics of southern and 
northern France serves to further mask the degree of change. It is well documented, for example, that the population of southern France declined during the 
period of 1680-1750 (Le Roy Ladurie 1974), while northern France lost population earlier (for example, see Reinhard et al. 1968: Figure 13). Currently (2000 
c.E.), all European countries exhibit a deficit of births over deaths, and in half of 
them, where immigration does not compensate this deficit, population is actually 
declining (U.S. Census Bureau data).

I now turn to the opposite end of Eurasia, and consider the population dynamics in China. The picture for China is complex. On one hand, the central authority 
in China (when it existed) conducted detailed censuses for tax purposes. On the 
other hand, corrupt or lazy officials often falsified or fabricated population data 
SECULAR CYCLES IN POPULATION NUMBERS 159 
(Ho 1959). Conversion coefficients between the number of taxable households 
and the actual population are often unknown, and, what is worse, these coefficients probably changed from dynasty to dynasty. The area controlled by the 
state also continually changed. Finally, it is often difficult to determine whether 
the number of taxable households declined during the times of trouble as a result 
of demographic change {death and emigration), or as a result of the state's failure 
to control and enumerate the subject population. Thus, there is a certain degree 
of controversy among the experts (Ho 1959; Durand 1960; Song et al. 1985).

However, the controversy primarily concerns the absolute population levels, and 
there is a substantial degree of agreement on the relative changes in population 
density (which are, of course, of primary interest for our purposes). The Chinese 
population, essentially, expanded during periods of political stability and declined 
(sometimes precipitously) during periods of unrest. As a result, population movements closely mirror the "dynastic cycle" in China (Ho 1959; Reinhard et al.

1968).

The most detailed trajectory of population dynamics in China was published 
by Chao and Hsieh (1988). These authors give estimates of Chinese population 
numbers at irregular time intervals. In order to make the data suitable for time 
series analysis, I interpolated Chao and Hsieh data using an exponential kernel 
with bandwidth of 10 years and then subsampled the resulting smoothed trajectory 
at 10-year intervals. The trajectory is clearly nonstationary and has at least two 
abrupt steplike changes: (1) until the eleventh century, the population peaked in 
the vicinity of 50 million; (2) from the twelfth to the beginning of the eighteenth 
century, population peaks doubled to around 100 million, (3) beginning in the 
eighteenth century the population started growing at a very rapid pace, reaching 
400 million during the nineteenth and more than 1 billion during the twentieth 
century. The mechanism underlying the shift from period 1 to period 2 is known.

Prior to the eleventh century, the center of gravity of the Chinese state was 
situated in the north, with the south lightly settled. Under the Sung dynasty the 
south matched and then overtook the north (for example, see Reinhard et al. 1968: 
Figures 14 and 115).

Dropping the third period as least amenable to detrending, I focused on the 
period from 200 B.C.E. to 1710 c.E., which gives us 192 points (sampled at decadal 
intervals). If we divide this series into three equal-sized pieces, then the second 
division neatly separates the 50 million peak period from that characterized by 
100 million peaks (see Figure 8.3). The splitting of the series into 6.4-centurylong pieces seems appropriate, because each piece should be long enough for 
several oscillations ( = "data points").

The results of analyzing these three series, using both delay choices (two and 
three decades), are presented in Table 8.1. The analysis detects a somewhat lower 
signal/noise ratio and more negative Lyapunov exponents in the Chinese series 
compared to the England data (the difference is especially clear when T = 3 is 
used). This is probably due, at least in part, to the greater measurement error, 
but there also seems to be a. genuine difference between western European and 
Chinese dynamics, in that Chinese oscillations are much more variable in period.

120 
