empire, the Burgundi invaded deep into Roman Gaul and established their kingdom in EFR, while the Alamanni pushed south into Rhaetia (which is outside our 
area of interest). During the fourth and fifth centuries the intensity of the frontier 
passing though NFR and EFR was greatly enhanced by the religious fault line: 
whereas Roman Gauls were Christians, Franks and Alamanni were pagans (the 
Franks converted around 500 c.E., and the Alamanni during the seventh century).

On the March of Frankish Empire 
After the Franks established their empire, NFR remained on the frontier, albeit 
of a different polity. During the fifth century the peninsula of Brittany was colonized by Celtic people from the British Isles who established their own polity, 
independent of the Merovingian Franks. As a result, the area between the lower 
Seine and Loire became the march of Brittany. The intensity of the frontier, however, decreased because both Bretons and Franks (after 496 c.E.) were Christian, 
although there were significant religious differences between their two brands of 
Christianity. The Carolingians subjugated the Bretons for a brief period of time, 
but were unable to convert their military superiority into lasting political control 
(Galliou and Jones 1991). Although the civilizational difference between Bretons 
and Franks was not very great, nevertheless, during the ninth century the intensity 
of warfare between the two ethnies was very high (Dunbabin 1985:66). As a result of continuous raiding and counter-raiding, a whole swath of territory running 
between the lower Seine and the lower Loire became depopulated to a significant 
degree. This was precisely the area into which the Norman invaders managed to 
wedge themselves (Searle 1988).

VJ.ki.ngs first settled in the areas around the mouths of the Loire and the Seine.

The Loire settlement was ultimately unsuccessful, but the Seine one expanded 
by degrees. During the ninth and tenth centuries, the area between Rouen and 
Paris and north of the Loire again became a very intense metaethnic fault line, 
combining religious, linguistic, and military pressure components. Only after the 
Normans assimilated (both religiously and linguistically) to the Latin Christian 
metaethnie did the intensity of the frontier decline.

To summarize, from the third to the tenth century, NFR. was the site of a 
major frontier, first part of the Roman limes and then as a Frankish march. The 
intensity of this frontier waxed and waned between high and medium levels, as 
various Germanic invaders assimilated to the Romance language and Christian 
religion, but the frontier conditions were essentially continuous. According to 
the metaethnic frontier theory, it was precisely this ethnic cauldron where the 
French experienced their ethnogenesis and France was born. Before discussing 
this process, however, I briefly review the events in the neighboring region of 
NED.

Ethnogenesis of Franks 
NED (modem Benelux plus a piece of Germany west of the Rhine) became a 
frontier earlier, during the first century, and also ceased to be a frontier before 
NFR, in the late eighth century (after the Carolingians conquered and converted 
the Frisians and Saxons ). Thus, ethnogenesis in NED preceded that in NFR.. Prior 
to the Roman conquest of Gaul the region was inhabited by a variety of small 
tribes lacking any cultural means for scaling up collective solidarity. After the 
Roman frontier was established in the first century B.C.E., the selective pressure 
for such cultural mechanisms became very intense (Miller 1993). The Roman 
Empire during the Principate exerted an enormous amount of military pressure 
on the region (the limes ran right through the middle of NED). Conversely, during 
the troubled third century and the Dominate, the "push" exerted by the Empire became an equally irresistible "pull." As I discussed before, the pull factor provides 
a strong selection pressure for scaling-up structures, since in order to acquire really significant loot, large raiding parties need to be organized, capable of taking 
whole cities (which during the Dominate began acquiring fortifications). Additionally, the religious gradient across the frontier became very steep after 300 c.E.: 
the Empire became Christian, while the Franks practiced a rather aggressive form 
of paganism, which acted as an important unifying force in the Frankish ethnogenesis (Miller 1993). Another factor was the political mechanism evolved by the 
Franks: the "long-haired kings" (Scherman 1987). Prior to 300 C.E., western Germans did not have the institution of kingship (unlike eastern Germanic tribes like 
the Goths). The amalgamation of various tribes (Chamavi, Chattuari, Bructeri, 
Amsivarii, Salii, and others) into a single Frankish ethnie (Geary 1988:78) is precisely what the metaethnic frontier theory predicts. In sum, Frankish ethnogenesis 
fits the frontier model very well.

The French Ethnogenesis 
When most of NFR became incorporated into the Merovingian Empire, its ethnic 
composition was very diverse. On the Gallic substrate (which itself was ethnically very heterogeneous, but that is another story), two other groups were superimposed. First, there were the colonists from the rest of the Roman Empirelegionnaires, who served and then settled on the frontier, plus their dependents 
CASE STUDIES 173 
and descendants (Geary 1988:15). Second, there were Franks moving from the 
north. Frankish farmers were probably the dominant ethnic element north of the 
Seine and a substantial influence down to the Loire. The reason that this region 
experienced such heavy colonization during the third to fifth centuries is probably 
because of the drastic population decline which occurred during the second half 
of the third century, when the proportion of archaeological sites occupied was 
only 45% of the second-century peak (Lewit 1991). After a brief rise during the 
fourth century, the population of north Gaul collapsed even lower, so that only 
9% of dwellings were occupied after 400 c.E. (Lewit 1991). Such drastic depopulation of a countryside is one of the typical characteristics of a high-intensity 
metaethnic frontier.

During the fifth century the western part of NFR was colonized by Bretons 
(Musset 1975: 112). The final substantial ethnic infusion occurred during the ninth 
and tenth centuries, when various Germanic peoples from Scandinavia established the Duchy of Normandy (Searle 1988). These diverse ethnic groups were 
relatively rapidly assimilated to a common religion (Christianity) and language 
(vulgar Latin evolving into northern French-langue d'oi1). The process was particularly rapid for Normans, who accomplished it within two centuries. Linguistic 
assimilation of the Franks was probably a more drawn-out process, with islands 
of Frankish language, the precursor of modem Dutch, persisting into the eleventh 
century. Assimilation of the Bretons took the longest time (the majority of Bretons switched to French only in the nineteenth century).

The relative rapidity with which Germanic intruders (Franks and Normans) 
assimilated to the region's common culture raises a set of interesting questions.

Why did Normans assimilate so rapidly (in the course of two centuries), while 
Bretons required more than a millennium? As was discussed in Chapter 6, current sociological thinking suggests that the rapidity of assimilation depends on 
the nature of social networks. Were there significant gaps between the Breton 
network and the rest of the population in NFR? Did the Normans rapidly establish dense connections with the Frankish network? A related observation is that 
the linguistic assimilation of southern France was quite slow. Although the region was conquered by the French in the thirteenth century, three centuries later 
only large cities were French speaking, while the majority of inhabitants spoke 
Occitan (langue d'oc). The midpoint was crossed only after three more centuries 
elapsed, during the late 1800s. Incidentally, the multiethnic nature of France during most of its existence is the reason I refer to it as an empire. Even by 1868, 
essentially at the end of the period of interest, French was the native language 
of only one-third of the inhabitants of France. Another third spoke it as a second 
language, and the rest could not speak it at all (Weber 1976).

