The more traditional language for modeling dynamical systems, based on 
differential (or difference) equations, has several advantages. First, it has been 
greatly standardized, so that a model written as a system of differential equations 
is much easier to grasp than the computer code describing the same assumptions. This, of course, assumes that the person viewing the model has had much 
experience with such equations, which unfortunately is not the case with most 
social scientists, or even biologists, for that matter. Still, one may hope that the 
level of numeracy in nonphysical sciences will increase with time, and perhaps 
this book will be of some help here. Second, analytical results are available for 
most simple or medium-complexity models. Even if we do not have an explicit 
analytical solution (which is the case for most nonlinear models), we can obtain analytical insights about qualitative aspects of long-term dynamics predicted 
by these models. Third, numerical methods for solving differential models have 
been highly standardized. Thus, other researchers can rather easily check on the 
numerical results of the authors. To sum up, differential (difference) equations 
provide an extremely useful common language for theory building in dynamical 
applications.

Note that I am not arguing against the use of ABSs. In fact, I find the recently proposed agenda for doing social science from the bottom up by growing 
STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 7 
artifical societies (Epstein and Axtell 1996) extremely exciting (for an excellent 
volume illustrating the strength of this approach when applied to real problems in 
the social sciences, see Kohler and Gumerman 2000). Rather, I suggest that the 
ABS should always be supplemented by other approaches, which may lack the 
power of ABSs, but are better at extracting, and communicating, the important 
insights from the chaos of reality. The best approach to building theory is the one 
that utilizes all the available tools: from pencil-and-paper analysis of models to 
numerical solutions to agent-based simulations.

1.3 SUMMARY 
To summarize the discussion in this introductory chapter, here is my proposal for 
a research program for theory building in historical dynamics.

• Define the problem to be addressed: the territorial dynamics of agrarian polities. The main questions are, why do some polities at certain times expand? 
And why do they, at other times, contract, or even completely disappear? 
More luridly, what are the causal mechanisms underlying the rise and demise 
of empires? 
• Identify the primary data set: the spatiotemporal record of territorial dynamics within a certain part of the world and a certain period of time. The data 
set serves as the testing bed for various mechanistic theories. The success 
of each theory is measured by how well its predictions match quantitative 
patterns in the primary data.

• Identify a set of hypotheses, each proposing a specific mechanism, or a 
combination of mechanisms, to explain territorial expansion/contraction of 
polities. Many of these hypotheses have already been proposed, others may 
need to be constructed de novo. The list of hypotheses does not have to 
be exhaustive, but it should include several that appear most likely, given 
the present state of knowledge. Hypotheses also do not need to be mutually 
exclusive.

• Translate all hypotheses in the list into mathematical models. Typically, a 
single hypothesis will be translated into a spectrum of models, using alternative assumptions about functional forms and parameter values.

• Identify secondary data. These are the data that we need for each specific hypothesis and its associated spectrum of models. For example, if a hypothesis 
postulates a connection between population growth and state collapse, then 
we need data on population dynamics. Secondary data provide the basis for 
auxiliary tests of hypotheses (in addition to tests based on the primary data).

Thus, predictions from a hypothesis based on population dynamics should 
match the observed patterns in the population data. On the other hand, a 
hypothesis based on legitimacy dynamics does not need to predict population data also; instead, its predictions should match temporal fluctuations of 
legitimacy.

• Solve the models using appropriate technology (that is, analytical, numerical, 
and simulation methods). Select those features of the models' output where 
there is a disagreement among hypotheses/models, and use the primary data 
set to determine which hypothesis predicts this aspect better than others.

Take into account the ability of each hypothesis to predict the appropriate 
secondary data, how parsimonious is the model into which the hypothesis 
is translated, and any degree of circularity involved (for example, when the 
same data are used for both parameter estimation and model testing). Make 
a tentative selection in favor of the model (or models) that predicts various 
features of the data best with the least number of free parameters.

• Repeat the process, by involving other hypotheses and by locating more data 
that can be used to test various models.

Clearly this is a highly idealized course of action, which sounds almost naive in 
its positivistic outlook. In practice, it is unlikely that it will work just as described 
above. Nevertheless, there is a value in setting the goal high. The rest of the book 
presents a deliberate attempt to follow this research program. As we shall see, 
reality will intrude in a number of sobering ways. Yet I also think that the results, 
while failing to achieve the lofty goals set out above, prove to be instructive. But 
this is for the readers to judge.

Chapter Two 
Geopolitics 
Geopolitics, in the narrow sense that I use in this book, concerns itself with the 
spatial aspects of historical dynamics. There are two major kinds of mechanisms 
invoked in geopolitical models: the ability to project power at distance, and the 
effect of spatial position. Thus, geopolitics is a natural place to start in my review 
of theories for territorial dynamics of states. Additionally, it is one of the besttheorized areas in historical sociology (for example, Collins 1978, 1986, 1995), 
and perhaps enjoys the greatest number of already existing formal models (see 
below). However, my argument in this chapter indicates that geopolitical models 
(in the narrow sense) are insufficient for the explanation of empirical patterns; in 
particular, they fail to account for a sustained decline of formerly powerful and 
territorially extensive polities.

2.1 A PRIMER OF DYNAMICS 
Rather than starting immediately with geopolitical models, I first review some 
basic facts about general kinds of behaviors that can be exhibited by dynamical 
