(E), and the accumulated state resources (S). As in the basic demographic-fiscal 
model, growth of commoner population results in decreased per capita productivity. Specifically, I assume that production per peasant is a linearly decreasing 
function of peasant population size. To connect production to population dynamics, I assume that the per capita rate of the commoner population growth is a 
linear function of the resources available to each producer. If the resources per 
peasant capita are over a certain threshold, then the peasant population will increase. On the other hand, if too high a proportion is extracted, then the peasant 
population will decline. In the Appendix I show that if peasants dispose of all 
resources that they produce, then their population dynamics is described by the 
logistic equation.

Peasants, however, are not allowed to keep all the food they produce. In the 
Appendix I derive a model for resource extraction by the elites. The key element 
of the model is the amount of coercion that the elites are able to bring to bear 
on the peasants. At low elite numbers, E, the amount of coercion they will be 
able to generate (and, thus, the proportion of resources that they will be able to 
extract from the producers) is directly proportional to E. However, as E increases, 
the nobles cannot extract more resources than what are produced. Thus, although 
increased elite numbers allow a greater proportion of production to be extracted 
from the peasants, ability of the elite to extract resources suffers from diminishing 
returns, so that resources extracted per elite capita decline with increased elite 
numbers.

The population dynamics of elites is modeled in the same way as that of 
peasants. If resources per elite capita are high, the elite population grows by reproduction and recruitment from the general populace. If per capita resources are 
low, then elite population shrinks as a result of reduced reproduction, increased 
mortality, and downward mobility. It is clear, however, that the threshold amount 
of resources necessary for an elite household to sustain and reproduce itself is 
set at a much higher value than the equivalent parameter for commoners.

As in the basic model, the state resources change as a result of revenues and 
expenditures. On the revenue side, I assume that the extracted resources are divided between the elites (rents) and the state (taxes). However, the portion of 
the extracted resources that actually ends up in the state's coffers is a dynamic 
quantity. When the resources extracted from peasants are sufficient to maintain 
the consumption levels expected by the elites, they will pass along the taxes due 
to the state. However, as elite numbers increase, and each elite household obtains 
a diminishing amount of resources for maintenance and reproduction, the elites 
will divert an increasing proportion of taxes to their needs. Historically, nobles 
used a variety of practices to appropriate the state's revenues. They petitioned 
the authorities for tax forgiveness, pleading poverty. Second, they often simply 
failed to transmit taxes to the state, keeping them for themselves (this option is 
THE DEMOGRAPHIC-STRUCTURAL THEORY 129 
available when landowners collect taxes). Third, elite members serving as officials used a variety of corrupt practices to divert state-owed taxes into their own, 
and their clan's pockets. The end result in all cases was that, as elites became 
impoverished, the state received a decreasing fraction of the product extracted 
from the commoners. I model this dynamic by assuming that each elite household keeps the resources they need to maintain themselves and then transmits a 
fixed proportion of the surplus to the state.

Next, arguing by analogy with the derivation of the basic model, I assume 
that state expenditures grow linearly with elite numbers, because the state has to 
provide employment to them as officers, bureaucrats, and priests. This argument 
assumes that state expenses associated with increased commoner numbers are 
negligible compared to the demands made on the state by elites. (It is certainly 
possible to add commoner-related expenditures, but this complicates the model 
and does not change the main result.) 
Finally, we need to model the effect of S on the population dynamics of P 
and E. As discussed in Section 7.1, S can either affect the productive capacity 
of the society (as in the basic demographic-fiscal model) or act on demographic 
rates. In the Appendix I derive two versions of the model, one for each of these 
two cases. The first model is completely analogous to the basic demographicfiscal model: high S increases the carrying capacity of the peasant population. In 
the second model, I assume that the presence of a strong state imposes peace on 
the elites: intraelite competition does not take lethal forms, and elite extinction 
rate is low. When the state is absent or weak, however, intense intraelite conflict 
leads to increased elite extinction rate.

Both models generate basically the same kinds of dynamics, so I will focus 
on the second one, in which S affects elite demography. I will refer to it as the 
selfish elite model, because it assumes that elites oppress commoners without 
any regard for their well-being, and transmit taxes to the state only if they have 
satisfied their own basic requirements.

A numerical investigation of the selfish elite model indicates that it is capable of 
three kinds of dynamic behaviors. First, for certain parameters the elites cannot 
get themselves established and go extinct. Second, after an initial episode of 
state building and collapse, the elites and producers approach an equilibrium and 
remain there in perpetuity (Figure 7 .3a). (For some parameters, the state never 
gets going, and the stateless equilibrium is approached directly.) What happens is 
that the growth of the commoner population creates a large resource base, which 
allows the elites to rapidly expand their numbers. The state grows in parallel 
with this initial elite expansion. However, as elite numbers grow, an increasingly 
greater proportion of the extracted product goes just to maintain them at the 
minimum level, and the proportion going to the state begins to decrease. At 
the same time, the demands of the elites on the state increase, so at some point 
expenditures overwhelm revenues. Just as in the basic model, this eventually leads 
to state collapse. Meanwhile, the elite demand on peasant-produced resources 
becomes so intense that peasants are left with less food than they need to sustain 
themselves. As a result of this intense oppression, peasant numbers begin to 
decline. After the state collapses, the ensuing period of anarchy is characterized 
(a) 
p 
E 
0 200 400 600 800 1000 
(b) 
0 200 400 600 800 1000 
Time 
Figure 7.3 Dynamics of the selfish elite model. (a) A stable equilibrium in a stateless 
society. Parameters are 1 = 81 = 0.02, p0 = 2, 2 = 0.5, 82 = 0.025, ")' = 10, a= 0.2. (b) 
Stable limit cycles. Same parameters as in (a) except 82 =0.1.

by intense exploitation of peasants and highly lethal intraelite conflict. As a result, 
numbers of both commoners and nobility decline, and after some mild oscillations 
approach an equilibrium.
